SSS 



TOT fan! 



f , 

v, Lost cards and change of residence must 







!!fflfe frf 



a 



aJ- 



s-* i 



M&EM... 



iZJ-EO 



"HOT 



r 

ill ___ 

vrm 



ABOUT ZIONISM 



THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

NBWtOEK . BOSTON CHICAGO . DALLAS 
ATLANTA SAN FEANCISCO 

MACMILLAN & CO., LIMITED 

LONDON BOMBAY . CALCUTTA 



THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
01 CANADA, LIMITED 

TOEOKTO 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

SPEECHES AND LETTERS 

BY 

PROFESSOR ALBERT EINSTEIN 



Translated and Edited with an Introduction 

BY 

tEON SIMON 



NEW YORK 

THE MACMUXAN COMPANY 
1931 



COPYRIGHT, 1931, 

BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY. 

All rights reserved no part of this book 
may be reproduced in any form without 
permission in writing from the publisher. 

Set up and printed. Published February, 1931, 



SET UP BY BROWN BROTHERS LINOTYfEES 

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

BY THE FERHIS PMNTING COMPANY 



CONTENTS 

PAGE 

INTRODUCTION ........ 9 

ASSIMILATION AND NATIONALISM ... 31 

THE JEWS IN PALESTINE 55 

JEW AND ARAB 67 

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY ...... 89 



ABOUT ZIONISM 



INTRODUCTION 

THERE are two main ways of approach to 
Zionism. One starts from those Jews who 
are made to suffer for being Jews, the other 
from the smaller number who are not. In the 
one case Zionism means the transfer of 
masses of Jews from countries in which they 
are obviously not wanted to a country which 
they might call their own; in the other case 
it means the re-creation in Palestine of a 
Hebraic type of life, which will be regarded 
by all Jews as the embodiment of their own 
distinctive outlook and ideals, and will thus 
help to counteract the inevitable tendency of 
the Jews, when they are not driven back on 
themselves by external restrictions, to lose 
their sense of being a separate people. 

Of these two conceptions of Zionism, the 
former has the more direct and obvious ap~ 

C9J 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

peal. The f act that masses of Jews are made 
to suffer for die crime of being Jews and 
wishing to remain Jews is too patent to call 
for demonstration; and, while it is true that 
in some countries Jewish disabilities have 
been removed so far as that can be done by 
statute, bitter experience engenders a scepti- 
cal attitude towards the idea that universal 
emancipation will provide a panacea for the 
Jew's troubles. In the first place, the countries 
with the largest numbers of Jews are not all 
eager to admit them to full equality; and in 
the second place, even where equality has 
been accorded, dislike o the Jew often makes 
itself felt too strongly for his liking or com- 
fort. Hence, from the point of view of a Jew 
who wishes to see his people better off in the 
world than it is to-day, or has been these 
many centuries, there is much to commend a 
scheme which sets out to cut at the root of 
the trouble by removing all the victims of 
anti-Semitism to a land of their own. By con- 
[10} 



INTRODUCTION 

trast with this perfectly simple and intelli- 
gible idea, the other conception of Zionism 
appears abstruse, almost other-worldly. The 
problem to which it offers a solution is one 
of which the existence, let alone the urgency, 
is not readily realised by ordinary men and 
women. It requires no great exercise of 
thought or imagination to appreciate the un- 
enviable position of the Jewish masses, or the 
desirability of transporting them to a safe 
home of refuge. It is less easy to recognise 
that the emancipated Jew presents, from the 
point of view of Jewish survival, at least as 
difficult a problem as the unemancipated; 
that the very removal of restrictions on the 
political and economic freedom of the Jews 
in this or that country creates conditions 
which are more inimical than persecution to 
the maintenance of whatever is worthily dis- 
tinctive of the Jew as such; that the conse- 
quent disintegration of an ancient people, in- 
volving the disappearance of one of die 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

world's great cultures, Is even more tragic 
than the material ills of the Jewish masses; 
and that the paramount need of the hour is 
a safe home of refuge for the Jewish spirit. 
The line of argument here briefly indicated 
takes us into the realm of abstract and meta- 
physical conceptions, of which the common 
man is impatient. It presupposes the idea 
that the reality of a people's being is to be 
found in its distinctive "spirit,** by which it 
is differentiated from other peoples, and that 
a people lives just in so far as it is able freely 
to embody its spirit in the forms and activi- 
ties of an organised corporate existence of its 
own. It regards a people as something big- 
ger than the sum-total of the individuals who 
compose it at any given time, as a personal- 
ity with a soul and a life and a history; it re- 
gards the well-being of a people as some- 
thing not to be measured in terms of the 
material prosperity or the political freedom 
of its individual members. In relation to the 



INTRODUCTION 

Jewish people in particular, it sees the crux 
of the problem in the fact that the national 
personality is unable, in present conditions., 
to be creatively self -expressive; and it seeks 
to save the people by securing for it the pos- 
sibility of another period of self-expression, 
naturally in the only land which the people 
can in any sense call its own. This type of 
Zionism, often called "Spiritual Zionism," is 
more subtle and more radical than the other, 
which is known, even less appropriately, as 
"Political Zionism." It can be defended on 
philosophical grounds, and, despite its ap- 
parent abstractness, on strictly practical 
grounds; but it does not speak with the 
clarion voice that rallies millions to a banner. 
Hence it is not surprising that Zionism did 
not begin to assume the proportions of a large 
popular movement before 1895, when Theo- 
dor Herzl, in his Judenstaat, propounded the 
beautifully simple idea of finding, on some 
more or less unoccupied portion of the 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

earth's surface, an autonomous home of 
refuge for those Jews who could not or 
would not become completely assimilated to 
their surroundings. Herzl did much more 
than propound the idea: he spent the rest of 
his brief and care-laden days in working for 
its realisation. He created the Zionist Organ- 
isation, the Jewish Colonial Trust to provide 
financial backing for the diplomatic work of 
Zionism, the Jewish National Fund to pur- 
chase land in Palestine. He gave to the Jew- 
ish masses the hope and the vision for which 
they had unconsciously been yearning, and 
fired their imagination as it had not been fired 
for many a long year. But his actual plan 
did not come to fruition. There was no 
country which could be turned into a Jewish 
country. The only land of which the Jews 
were willing to think as potentially their 
own was Palestine. As individuals they were 
ready (and, in those days, able) to migrate 
from Eastern Europe to countries already 
[14} 



INTRODUCTION 

developed, and to fit themselves as best they 
might into the existing national structures; 
for a national home of their own they wanted 
Palestine and Palestine only. But Palestine 
was not suitable for a rapid mass-settlement; 
and even if it had been, neither the requisite 
political conditions nor the necessary finan- 
cial resources were forthcoming. If the life 
of the Zionist Organisation had depended on 
its prospect of accomplishing within a meas- 
urable time the mass-migration and the 
autonomous state which were fundamental to 
Herd's original conception, it would not 
have lived for ten years. In fact, there was 
something more behind it than a grandiose 
but impracticable vision. "Spiritual Zion- 
ism/' despite its lack of mass appeal, was yet 
able in the hour of need to provide an objec- 
tive which could keep the Organisation to- 
gether when its original raison d'etre had dis- 
appeared. Not, of course, that the Organisa- 
tion officially adopted the philosophy of 
[15] 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

Spiritual Zionism as its own. Its programme, 
its phraseology, its visions remained un- 
changed. But as a matter of hard fact, it 
reconciled itself to comparatively small-scale 
work in the field of Palestinian development. 
The settlement of some thousands of Jews on 
the soil of Palestine, the concurrent growth 
of Jewish industry in the principal towns, the 
creation of a network of Hebrew schools 
these and similar activities, important as a 
demonstration of the unimpaired capacity of 
the Jew to re-make the forms of his own life 
under modem conditions, and as a means of 
reviving the practical interest of the Jewish 
people in Palestine, bore no intelligible rela- 
tion to the vision o a safe home of refuge for 
the oppressed masses of Jewry. And to a 
large extent theory was inevitably influenced 
by practice. Zionists came to recognise not 
only that the idea of transporting the Jewish 
masses of Eastern Europe to Palestine was a 
will-o'-the-wisp, but also that there was posi- 



INTRODUCTION 

rive Jewish value in the establishment in 
Palestine of a relatively small nucleus of the 
Jewish people, speaking its own language 
and developing its own culture on the basis 
of a healthy economic structure. Nor, so long 
as Palestine remained in the hands of the 
Turks, did the question of the political future 
of this nucleus achieve practical importance. 
The Balfour Declaration of 1917, and the 
British Mandate for Palestine, changed the 
situation in two respects. The establishment 
of a progressive and friendly regime in Pal- 
estine removed many of the obstacles which 
had hampered Jewish development before the 
war; and Zionism has taken full advantage 
of the wider opportunities thus afforded, al- 
lowance being made for the fact that the 
Jewish people has suffered certainly not less 
than others from the impoverishment and 
the weariness of the post-war world. The 
Jewish population of Palestine has more than 
doubled in the last dozen years, and is now 
[17} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

in the neighbourhood of 160,000, about one- 
fifth of the total population of the country. 
Jews have developed modern methods in 
agriculture and industry, have drained 
marshes and brought neglected areas under 
cultivation, have successfully fought the en- 
demic diseases of the land, and have done a 
great deal in the direction of raising the gen- 
eral level of health and well-being. They 
have crowned their educational edifice with a 
Hebrew University, have made the Hebrew 
language once more their own, and on the 
foundation of this linguistic revival have 
achieved at least the first steps in the evolu- 
tion of a type of individual and of life which 
can be called Jewish, or Hebrew, without any 
hyphen* These developments are of some 
value to the world at large, in so far as they 
mean the cultivation of a long neglected es- 
tate. They are of benefit to the Arabs of Pal- 
estine, as bringing them wider cultural 
opportunities and a higher standard of life. 

18} 



INTRODUCTION 

They are of supreme importance to Jews the 
world over, not only because they have pro- 
vided many thousands of Jews from Eastern 
Europe with a better and healthier way of 
life, but more particularly because of the 
tonic effect of this gradual unfolding of the 
creative capacities of a people which has 
learnt, seeing itself through the eyes of 
others, to regard itself as incurably parasitic, 
and has forgotten, under the stress of perse- 
cution and the blandishments of emancipa- 
tion, that it has a great moral and intellec- 
tual heritage of its own. Not the least note- 
worthy effect of Zionist work in Palestine is 
the general quickening among Jews all over 
the world of the sense of belonging spirit- 
ually together, which is exemplified in the 
recently achieved union of Zionists and non- 
Zibnists in the Jewish Agency for Palestine. 

At the same time, the Balfour Declaration 
and the Mandate have brought into the fore- 
ground the hitherto dormant question of the 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

political status and future of the Jewish com- 
munity in Palestine itself. The Declaration 
contemplates "the establishment in Palestine 
of a national home for the Jewish people." 
It says nothing explicitly about the status of 
the Palestinian Jews, who are not, and are 
unlikely to be, more than a comparatively 
small fraction of that Jewish people to which 
the national home is promised. But it was 
naturally understood, both by those who gave 
and by those who received it, as implying a 
national status for that part of the Jewish 
people which is or will be in the national 
home itself. Nobody doubts that the Man- 
date was within the intention of the Declara- 
tion in recognising the Jews of Palestine as 
one of the national groups of the country & 
recognition most clearly exemplified in the 
status given to Hebrew as one of the official 
languages of Palestine. The Declaration 
means, in other words, that Palestine is not, 
as some people seem still to think, an Arab 
20] 



INTRODUCTION 

country into wMdh Jews may or may not be 
permitted to enter. It is a country to which 
a Jew as such has a right to belong; it is in 
some senses a Jewish land. But how much, or 
how little, is this going to mean in practice? 
Is Palestine intended to become wholly a 
Jewish land, in the sense that only its Jewish 
inhabitants will control its destinies (in so 
far as the destinies of any small country can 
be controlled by its inhabitants) and any 
others will have only such rights as the Jews 
see fit to allow than? If that position is un- 
thinkable while the Jews are in a minority, 
would it be possible if they became a major- 
ity? 

Justice and common-sense seem to dictate 
a negative answer to these questions. The 
two national groups which are recognised as 
belonging to Palestine, the Jewish and the 
Arab, ought to develop side by side on a basis 
of political equality. There ought to be no 
possibility of the domination of Arab by Jew 
[21} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

or of the exclusion of Jew by Arab. The ques- 
tion of majority or minority ought at no 
time, either now or in the future, to affect the 
principle of national equality. But nothing 
of this kind is dearly laid down in the Bal- 
four Declaration; and even If it had been, 
there Is no guarantee that the Arabs of Pales- 
tine would have accepted it as a reasonable 
view. For, rather paradoxically, one of the 
effects of the recognition of Jewish national 
aspirations has been to stimulate a Palestinian 
Arab nationalism which scarcely existed be- 
fore; and the spokesmen of this nationalism, 
unwilling to admit a Jewish claim even to 
equal rights in the country, are naturally 
anxious to persuade themselves and the world 
that the Jewish claim is not for equal rights, 
but for predominance. That idea, again, 
though flatly at variance with official Zionist 
declarations, has derived some colour from 
the exuberances of less responsible Zionists, 
and has had a favourable atmosphere in the 
[22} 



INTRODUCTION 

general vagueness of the political situation. 
Arab intransigence has naturally not encour- 
aged the development on the Jewish side o a 
policy of active co-operation between the two 
national groups, which would at best have 
been difficult enough by reason of the differ- 
ence in their cultural levels and of the fact 
that the Jews are as yet imperfectly Pales- 
tkused, and have to bend all their efforts to 
the securing of their own position in the 
country. In the result, the two national 
groups have remained, in all but the merely 
literal sense, too far apart for a spirit of 
mutual confidence to develop; and Arab poli- 
ticians, perhaps genuinely afraid of imag- 
inary Zionist ambitions, have had no great 
difficulty in stirring up mob passion on more 
than one occasion. The lamentable outbreak 
of violence in August 1929 may be said to 
have brought matters fco a head* It has not, 
of course, affected the inherent reasonable- 
ness of Zionist aims, or the determination of 
[23} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

Jews both in and out of Palestine to carry 
through the work of reconstruction which 
they have begun; but it has emphasised the 
desirability of taking active steps to bring 
about an understanding between the two peo- 
ples, instead of leaving it to time and slow 
education to bridge the gap. On the Arab 
side there is as yet scarcely any overt sign of 
a realisation of the need for a more construc- 
tive policy than that of demanding the repeal 
of the Balfour Declaration. But this attitude 
of mere negation can scarcely persist in the 
face of the Government's clear statement of 
its intention to give the Declaration effect; 
and there is no need to despair of a solution 
which will bring about permanent peace. 
There is no reason to anticipate any obstacle 
to such a solution on the Zionist side, though 
it has to be admitted that the recent handling 
of the situation by the Mandatory Power has 
not tended to strengthen the hands of those 
Zionists who are most firmly convinced of tie 



INTRODUCnON 

wisdom and the justice of a policy of 
moderation. 

Professor Einstein, some of whose scat- 
tered speeches and letters on Zionism and 
kindred questions are collected in this vol- 
ume, is better known to the world as a physi- 
cist than as a Zionist. Yet for many years 
past he has given abundant proof both of a 
keen interest in Zionism and of a penetrating 
insight into its underlying ideas. Himself an 
assimilated Jew, he is impelled to Zionism by 
his acute consciousness of the excessive price 
at which the blessings of assimilation are 
bought by the Jewish communities of the 
Western world, which for him are mainly 
represented by that of Germany. The price is 
a loss of solidarity, of moral independence 
and of self-respect. These, in his view, can 
be regained only if assimilated Jews find some 
common task, of absolute human value, to 
which they can bend their corporate energies 
as Jews. Such a task is to be found in the 
[25] 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

restoration of Jewish national life in Pales- 
tine, which involves the regeneration of Pal- 
estine itself and its transformation into a liv- 
ing and productive country. The fact that 
this regenerated Palestine wiU offer a home 
of refuge for many oppressed Jews is of sec- 
ondary importance. What matters most is 
the new moral freedom and health which 
Jewry will gain through devotion to an ideal 
at once Jewish and broadly human, and 
through the gradual emergence in Palestine 
of a civilisation at once Jewish and modern. 
Jewish nationalism is justified, even to a mind 
so essentially internationalist as Professor 
Einstein's, because without it the survival of 
the Jew is neither worth while nor ulti- 
mately possible. But, as might be expected, 
there is in Professor Einstein's nationalism 
no room for any kind of aggressiveness or 
chauvinism. For him the domination of Jew 
over Arab in Palestine, or the perpetuation of 
a state of mutual hostility between the two 
26} 



INTRODUCTION 

peoples, would mean the failure of Zionism- 
Hie events of August 1929 bitterly disap- 
pointed the hopes that he had built on the 
apparently friendly relations between work- 
ing Jews and working Arabs in Palestine, 
and on the advantages obviously derived by 
the Arab population from the Jewish devel- 
opment of the country; they have not altered 
his conviction that the realisation of the true 
aims of Zionism can be sought only along the 
line of peace and co-operation between Jews 
and Arabs. Throughout this difficult period 
he has been prominent among those Zionists 
who have urged most strongly a policy of 
active peace-seeking: indeed he has, perhaps 
inevitably, exposed himself to criticism for 
what the generality of Zionists regard at 
present as a somewhat extreme and prema- 
ture advocacy of that policy. 

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem repre- 
sents a side of Zionist activity which nat- 
urally makes a peculiarly strong appeal to 
27] 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

Professor Einstein, and he has been an active 
member of the Governing Body of the Uni- 
versity since its inception. He is, however, no 
less alive to the necessity and value of a solid 
material basis for the development of a Jew- 
ish civilisation in Palestine; and some years 
ago he undertook a tour of the United States 
on behalf of the Keren Hayesod (Palestine 
Foundation Fund). This combination of 
academic with practical interests, coupled 
with his transparent single-mindedness and 
simplicity of character, has won him the 
respect and affection of Zionists the world 
over. The Einstein Forest in Palestine may 
prove no less enduring a monument to his 
fame than the Theory of Relativity. 

This volume is composed of translations of 
extracts from speeches and letters delivered 
and written by Professor Einstein during the 
last nine or ten years. The speech or letter 
form has not been preserved, and short pas- 
sages of purely ephemeral interest have been 

[28] 



INTRODUCTION 

omitted here and there. The arrangement is 
roughly, but not strictly, chronological. Per- 
mission to reprint various passages has been 
readily given by the editors of the Manchester 
Guardian, the Judische Rundschau (Berlin) , 
the New Palestine (New York) , the Jewish 
Chronicle (London) , and the Judischer Al- 
manack (Prague) , to all of whom the Editor 
expresses his grateful acknowledgments. 

L.S. 
London, 
September 1930. 



ASSIMILATION AND NATIONALISM 



ASSIMILATION AND NATIONALISM 

I 

BEFORE we can effectively combat anti- 
Semitism, we must first of all educate our- 
selves out of it and out of the slave-mentality 
which it betokens. We must have more dig- 
nity, more independence, in our own ranks. 
Only when we have the courage to regard 
ourselves as a nation, only when we respect 
ourselves, can we win the respect of others; 
or rather, the respect of others will then come 
of itself. /Anti-Semitism as a psychological 
phenomenon will always be with us so long 
as Jews and non-Jews are thrown together. 
But where is the harm? It may be thanks to 
anti-Semitism that we are able to preserve 
our existence as a race; that at any rate is my 
belief. 

When I come across the phrase "German 
[33] 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

Citizens of the Jewish Persuasion," I cannot 
avoid a melancholy smile. What does this 
highfalutin* description really mean? What 
is this "Jewish persuasion"? Is there, then, 
a kind of non-persuasion by virtue of which 
one ceases to be a Jew? There is not. What 
the description really means is that our beaux 
esprits are proclaiming two things: 

First, I wish to have nothing to do with 
my poor (East European) Jewish breth- 
ren; 

Secondly, I wish to be regarded not as a 
son of my people, but only as a mem- 
ber of a religious community. 

Is this honest? Can an "Aryan" respect such 
dissemblers? I am not a German citizen, nor 
is there anything about me that can be de- 
scribed as "Jewish persuasion/' But I am a 
Jew, and I am glad to belong to the Jewish 
people, though I do not regard it as "chosen/' 
Let us just leave anti-Semitism to the non- 
[34] 



ASSIMILATION AND NATIONALISM 

Jews, and keep our own hearts warm for 
our kith and kin. 

(1920) 

n 

Until about a generation ago the Jews in 
Germany did not regard themselves as be- 
longing to the Jewish people. They felt 
themselves only members of a religious com- 
munity, and many of them still hold this 
point of view. They are, in fact, much more 
assimilated than the Russian Jews. They 
have been to mixed schools, and have thus 
adapted themselves to German national and 
cultural life. Nevertheless, and in spite of 
the equal political rights which they have 
secured, there exists in Germany a strong 
movement of social anti-Semitism. And it is 
just the educated drcles who have set them- 
selves up as carriers of this anti-Semitic dis- 
ease. They have built up for themselves a 
"culture** of anti-Semitism, while the edu- 
[35] 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

cated Russians, at least before the war, were 
on the whole philo-Semitic, and made fre- 
quent and honest endeavours to fight the anti- 
Semitic movement. 

This phenomenon in Germany is due to 
several causes. Partly it originates in the 
fact that Jews there exercise an influence over 
the intellectual life of the German people 
altogether out of proportion to their num- 
bers. While, in my opinion, the economic 
position of the German Jews is very much 
over-rated, the influence of Jews on the press, 
in literature and in science in Germany is 
very marked, as must be apparent to even the 
most superficial observer. This accounts for 
the fact that there are many anti-Semites 
there whose anti-Semitism is not just hatred 
of the Jew, but is based on arguments in 
which they honestly believe. They regard 
Jews as of a nationality different from the 
German, and therefore are alarmed at the in- 
creasing Jewish influence on their national 
36] 



ASSIMILATION AND NATIONALISM 

life. Although perhaps the percentage of 
Jews in England is not much less than in 
Germany, English Jews certainly do not exer- 
cise the influence on English society that 
German Jews do in Germany. This notwith- 
standing that the highest professional posi- 
tions are accessible to them, and a Jew can 
become Lord Chief Justice or Viceroy of 
India, whereas in Germany the attainment of 
such positions by a Jew is unthinkable. 

In many instances anti-Semitism, may be 
determined by political considerations. It 
often depends, in other words, on the politi- 
cal party to which a man belongs whether he 
becomes a professed anti-Semite. A Socialist, 
for instance, even if he is an anti-Semite by 
conviction, will not proclaim his creed or act 
up to it, because it is not in the programme of 
his party. Among Conservatives, however, it 
is different. Anti-Semitism in their case arises 
from a desire to exacerbate for their party 
purposes the ill-feeling inherent in the popu- 
[37} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

lace. In a country like England, this influ- 
ence is smaller than in many others, while the 
existence of old and deep-rooted liberal tradi- 
tions hinders the rapid growth of anti-Semit- 
ism. I say this without any personal knowl- 
edge of the country. I have never until now 
been in England. That, I would add in 
parenthesis, perhaps accounts for the enthu- 
siasm with which my theories were received 
here. But in Germany the judgement of my 
theories depended on the party politics of the 
press, while English science did not allow Its 
sense of objectivity to be disturbed by politi- 
cal views. The English people have had a 
great influence on the development of science, 
and so have tackled the examination of the 
theory of relativity with particular energy and 
particular success. Whilst in America, again, 
anti-Semitism knows only social forms, in 
Germany communal anti-Semitism is much 
stronger even than social. As I view the mat- 
ter, the fact of the racial peculiarities of Jews 
38} 



ASSIMILATION AND NATIONALISM 

Is bound to have an influence on their social 
intercourse. I believe that German Judaism 
is thus being influenced to a great extent by 
anti-Semitism. With increasing wealth and 
increasing education the religious customs 
which formerly prevented the mixing of Jews 
with Gentiles have tended to disappear. 
There was thus nothing but the antithesis 
which Jews represent, and which is called 
anti-Semitism, to preserve Jewish separate- 
ness. Without this antithesis assimilation in 
Germany would have been complete long 
ago. 

I have noticed this sort of thing in myself. 
Until two years ago I lived in Switzerland, 
and during my stay there I did not realise 
my Judaism. There was nothing that called 
forth any Jewish sentiments in me. When I 
moved to Berlin all that changed. There I 
realised the difficulties with which many 
young Jews were confronted. I saw how, 
amid anti-Semitic surroundings, systematic 
[39] 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

study, and with It the road to a safe exist- 
ence, was made impossible for them. This 
refers specially to the Eastern-born Jews in 
Germany, who were continually exposed to 
provocation. I do not believe that their num- 
ber is large in Germany as a whole. Only in 
Berlin are they at all numerous. Neverthe- 
less, their presence has become a public ques- 
tion. At meetings and conferences and in the 
press there is a movement for disposing of 
them quickly or interning them. Housing 
difficulties and the economic depression are 
used as arguments for these harsh measures. 
Facts are deliberately exaggerated in order 
to influence public opinion. These Eastern- 
born Jews are made the scapegoat of all the 
ills of present-day German political life and 
all the after-effects of the war. Incitement 
against these unfortunate fugitives, who have 
only just saved themselves from the hell 
which Eastern Europe means for them to-day, 
has become an effective political weapon, 
40} 



ASSIMILATION AND NATIONALISM 

employed with success by every demagogue. 
"When the Government contemplated the ex- 
pulsion of these Jews, I stood up for them, 
and pointed out in the Berliner Tageblatt the 
inhumanity and the folly of such a measure. 
Together with some colleagues, Jews and 
non-Jews, I started University courses for 
these Eastern-born Jews, and I must add that 
in this matter we enjoyed official recognition 
and considerable assistance from the Minis- 
try of Education. 

These and similar happenings have awak- 
ened in me the Jewish national sentimental 
am a national Jew in the sense that I demand 
the preservation of the Jewish nationality as 
of every other. I look upon Jewish national- 
ity as a fact, and I think that every Jew 
ought to come to definite conclusions on Jew- 
ish questions on the basis of this fact. I re- 
gard the growth of Jewish self-assertion as 
being in the interests of non-Jews as well as 
of Jews. That was the main motive of my 
[41] 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

joining the Zionist movement. For me Zion- 
ism is not merely a question of colonisation. 
The Jewish nation is a living thing, and the 
sentiment of Jewish nationalism must be 
developed both in Palestine and everywhere 
else. To deny the Jew's nationality in the 
Diaspora is, indeed, deplorable. If one 
adopts the point of view of confining Jewish 
ethnic nationalism to Palestine, then to all 
intents and purposes one denies the existence 
of a Jewish people. In that case one should 
have the courage to carry through assimila- 
tion as quickly and as completely as possible. 
We live in a time of intense and perhaps 
exaggerated nationalism. But my Zionism 
does not exclude cosmopolitan views. I be- 
lieve in the actuality of Jewish nationality, 
and I believe that every Jew has duties to- 
wards his co-religionists. The meaning of 
Zionism is thus many-sided. To Jews who 
despair in the Ukrainian hell or in Poland it 
opens out hopes of a more human existence. 
42} 



ASSIMILATION AND NATIONALISM 

Through the return of Jews to Palestine, and 
so to a normal and healthy economic life, 
Zionism involves a creative function, which 
should enrich mankind at large. But the 
main point is that Zionism must tend to en- 
hance the dignity and self-respect of the Jews 
in the Diaspora 1 nave always been annoyed 
by the undignified assimilationist cravings 
and strivings which I have observed in so 
many of my friends 

Through the establishment of a Jewish 
Commonwealth in Palestine, the Jewish peo- 
ple will again be In a position to bring Its 
creative abilities into full play without .hin- 
drance. Through the Jewish University and 
similar institutions the Jewish people will not 
only help forward Its own national renais- 
sance, but will enrich Its moral culture and 
knowledge, and will once again, as it was 
centuries ago, be guided into better ways of 
life than those which are inevitably imposed 
on it in present conditions, (1921) 

43} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

III 

The rebuilding of Palestine is for us Jews 
not a mere matter of charity or emigration: 
it is a problem of paramount importance for 
the Jewish people. Palestine is first and fore- 
most not a refuge for East European Jews, 
but the incarnation of a re-awakening sense 
of national solidarity. But is it opportune to 
revive and to strengthen this sense of soli- 
darity? To that question I must reply with an 
unqualified affirmative, not only because that 
answer expresses my instinctive feeling, but 
also, I believe, on rational grounds. \Let us 
glance at the history of the Jews in Germany 
during the last century or so!l A hundred 
years ago our ancestors, with very few excep- 
tions, still lived in the Ghetto. They were 
poor, and were separated from the Gentiles 
by a barrier of religious traditions, secular 
forms of life and legal restrictions. In their 
spiritual development they were confined to 
[44] 



ASSIMILATION AND NATIONALISM 

their own literature, and were influenced but 
faintly by the immense impetus which the 
Renaissance had given to the intellectual life 
of Europe. But in one respect these men, 
humbly placed and scantly regarded as they 
were, had a distinct advantage over us. Each 
one of them was bound by every fibre of his 
being to a community which embraced his 
whole existence, of which he felt himself a 
full member, and which made on him no 
demand that ran counter to Ms natural mode 
of thought. Our ancestors of those days were 
rather cramped both materially and spiritu- 
ally, but as a social organism they were in 
an enviable state of psychological equilib- 
rium. Then came emancigation. It opened 
undreamt-of vistas of progress. Individual 
Jews rapidly became at home in the higher 
strata of economic and social life. They 
eagerly absorbed the brilliant achievements 
of Western art and science. They threw 
themselves with ardour into these develqp- 
[45] 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

merits, and themselves made contributions of 
permanent value. In the process they adopted 
die ways of life of the non-Jewish world, 
became increasingly estranged from their own 
religious and social tradition, acquired non- 
Jewish habits, customs and modes of thought. 
It seemed as though they were going to be 
completely dissolved in the surrounding peo- 
ples, so much more numerous than them- 
selves, so superior in their political and cul- 
tural organisation, and that in a few genera- 
tions no visible trace of them would remain. 
The complete disappearance, of the Jews in 
Central and "Western Europe seemed inevi- 
table. But things turned out differently. 
Nations with racial differences appear to have 
instincts which work against their fusion. 
The assimilation of the Jews to the European 
nations among whom they lived, in language, 
in customs, and to some extent even in the 
forms of religious organisation, could not 
eradicate the feeling of a lack of kinship be- 
[46] 



ASSIMILATION AND NATIONALISM 

tween them and those among whom they 
lived. In the last resort, this instinctive feel- 
ing of lack of kinship is referable to the law 
of the conservation of energy. For this reason 
it cannot be eradicated by any amount of 
well-meant pressure. Nationalities do not 
want to be fused: they want to go each its 
own way. A state of peace can be brought 
about only if they mutually tolerate and 
respect one another. This demands above all 
things that we Jews become once more con- 
scious of our nationality, and regain the self- 
respect which is necessary to our national 
existence. We must learn once more to avow 
our ancestry and our history; we must once 
more take upon ourselves, as a nation, cul- 
tural tasks of a kind calculated to strengthen 
our feeling of solidarity. It is not sufficient 
for us to take part as individuals in the cul- 
tural work of mankind: we must also set 
our hands to some work which can serve the 
ends of our corporate national existence. In 
47} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

this way and in this way only can the Jewish 
people regain its health^/ 

It is from this point of view that I look 
upon the Zionist movement. History has 
to-day allotted us the task of contributing ac- 
tively to the economic and cultural recon- 
struction of Palestine. Inspired men of genius 
and vision have laid the foundations of our 
work, to which many of the best among us 
are prepared to devote their whole lives. It 
were well if all of us felt the full significance 
of the work and contributed each Ms utmost 
to its success. 

It was in America that I first discovered 
the Jewish people. I have seen any number 
of Jews, but the Jewish people I had never 
met either in Berlin or elsewhere in Ger- 
many. This Jewish people, which I found in 
America, came from Russia, Poland and 
Eastern Europe generally. These men and 
women still retain a healthy national feeling; 
it has not yet been destroyed by the process 
48} 



ASSIMILATION AND NATIONALISM 

of atomisation and dispersion. I found these 
people extraordinarily ready for self-sacrifice 
and practically creative. They have, for in- 
stance, managed in a short time to secure the 
future of the projected University in Jeru- 
salem, at any rate so far as the Medical Fac- 
ulty is concerned. I also found that it was 
mostly the middle classes and the ordinary 
folk, and not those enjoying a high social 
position or any natural advantages, who had 
most conspicuously preserved the healthy 
feeling of belonging together and the willing- 
ness to make sacrifices. The impression that 
I gained there is that if we really succeed in 
establishing a nucleus of the Jewish people in 
Palestine, we shaE once more have a spirit- 
ual centre, notwithstanding that the great 
majority of us are scattered over the world, 
and the feeling of isolation will disappear. 
That is the great redeeming effect which I 
anticipate from the rebuilding of Palestine. 

(1921) 
49] 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

IV 

I am convinced that our colonising work 
in Palestine will be successful in the sense 
that we shall create there a completely co- 
herent community, well fitted to form a 
moral and spiritual centre for the Jewish peo- 
ple. Therein, and not on the economic side, 
I see the real significance for us all of the 
work of reconstruction. In my opinion it is 
not so important for Palestine to become 
economically independent at the earliest pos- 
sible moment as for it to possess a high 
spiritual and moral value for the whole Jew- 
ish people. From this point of view much 
has already been achieved by the revival of 
Hebrew. Institutions for the pursuit of the 
arts and sciences must follow. In this connec- 
tion I attach the greatest importance to the 
Hebrew University. Palestine will not solve 
the Jewish problem, but its development will 
[50] 



ASSIMILATION AND NATIONALISM 

mean a revival of die soul of the Jewish 
people. (1923) 

V 

Generally speaking, it does not accord with 
my ideal that communities bound together 
by the bond of race or tradition should make 
special efforts to cultivate and emphasise 
their separateness. In so far, however, as a 
given community is attacked as such, it is 
bound to defend itself as such, in order that 
its individual members may be able to main- 
tain their material and spiritual interests. 
Corporate action is needed to save the indi- 
vidual from those spiritual dangers which 
isolation necessarily entails. Whoever under- 
stands this dearly must approve of united 
action by all Jews for a corporate purpose, 
be he never so unsympathetic in principle to 
nationalism. 

It is for me beyond any shadow of doubt 
{51} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

that In present circumstances the rebuilding 
of Palestine is the only object which has a 
sufficiently strong appeal to stimulate the 
Jews to effective corporate action. It is the 
immortal service of Herzl that he was the 
first to see this clearly and to draw the right 
practical conclusions. For this reason I am 
convinced that every Jew who cares at all for 
the health and the dignity of Jewry must co- 
operate with all his power in the realisation 
of Herd's ideal. 

The German Jew who works for the Jew- 
ish people and for the Jewish home in Pales- 
tine no more ceases to be a German than the 
Jew who becomes baptised and changes his 
name ceases to be a Jew. The two attach- 
ments are grounded in realities of different 
kinds. The antithesis is not between Jew and 
German, but between honesty and lack of 
character. He who remains true to his origin, 
race and tradition will also remain loyal to 
the State of which he is a subject. He who 
52} 



ASSIMILATION AND NATIONALISM 

Is faithless to the one will also be faithless 
to the other. (1926) 

VI 

The greatest enemies of Jewish national 
consciousness and Jewish dignity are fatty 
degeneration by which 1 mean the loss of 
moral fibre which results from wealth and 
comfort and a kind of spiritual dependence 
on the surrounding non- Jewish world, which 
Is a consequence of the disruption of Jewish 
corporate life. The best In a man can be 
brought out only when he belongs entirely 
to a human group. Hence there Is grave 
moral danger in the position of the Jew who 
has lost contact with his own national group, 
and Is regarded as an alien by the group 
among which he lives. Often enough a situ- 
ation of this kind has produced a despicable 
and joyless egotism. 

The external pressure on the Jewish peo- 
ple Is particularly heavy at the present time. 
53] 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

Yet our very sufferings have been whole- 
some. There has set in a revival of Jewish 
corporate life, of which the last generation 
but one could not have dreamt Under the 
influence of the newly awakened sense of 
Jewish solidarity, the colonisation of Pales- 
tine, carried out by able and devoted leaders 
in the teeth of apparently insuperable difficul- 
ties, has already produced such favourable 
results that I cannot doubt its permanent 
effect. This work is of high value for the 
Jews of the whole world. Palestine will be- 
come a cultural home for all Jews, a refuge 
for the worst sufferers from oppression, a 
field of activity for the best among us, a 
unifying ideal and a source of spiritual 
health for the Jews of every country. 

(1929) 



[54] 



THE JEWS AND PALESTINE 



THE JEWS AND PALESTINE 



THE Palestine problem, as I see It, Is two- 
fold. There Is first the business of settling 
the Jews In the country. This demands ex- 
ternal assistance on a large scale; It cannot 
be successfully accomplished unless the na- 
tional resources of Jewry are laid under con- 
tribution. The second task Is that of stimu- 
lating private initiative, especially in the 
commercial and industrial spheres. 

The deepest impression left on me by 
Zionist work in Palestine Is that of the self- 
sacrifice of the young men and women work- 
srs. Gathered here from all sorts of different 
environments, they have succeeded, under 
the Influence of a common Ideal, in forming 
iemselves Into closely-knit communities and 
in working together on lines of systematic 
{57} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

co-operation. I was also most favourably 
impressed by the spirit of initiative shown in 
the urban development There is something 
here that almost suggests an avalanche. One 
feels that the work is being borne along on 
the wings of a strong national sentiment, 
Nothing else could explain the extraordi- 
narily rapid advance, especially on the sea- 
coast near Tel-Aviv. 

At no time did I get the impression that 
the Arab problem might threaten the devel- 
opment of the Palestine project. I believe 
rather that, among the working classes espe- 
cially, Jew and Arab on the whole get on 
excellently together. The difficulties which 
are as it were inherent in the situation do not 
rise above the threshold of consciousness 
when one is on the spot. The problem of the 
rehabilitation and sanitation of the country 
seems incomparably more difficult. 

It is a common thing for Jews to miss the 
significance of the Palestine question: they 



THE JEWS AND PALESTINE 

do not see what It has to do with them. It Is 
Indeed easy to ask what It matters to a scat- 
tered nation of so many millions whether a 
million or a million and a half of them are 
settled In Palestine. But for me the Impor- 
tance of all this Zionist work lies precisely 
In the effect that it wiE have on those Jews 
who will not themselves live in Palestine. 
We must distinguish in this connection be- 
tween internal and external effects. The 
internal effect, in my opinion, will be a 
healthier Jewry: that is t say, the Jews will 
acquire that happiness in feeling themselves 
at one, that sense of being self-sufficient, 
which a common Ideal cannot fall to evoke. 
This is already evident in the younger gen- 
eration of our day not among the young 
Zionists only and distinguishes it, greatly to 
Its advantage, from earlier generations, whose 
endeavours to be absorbed in non-Jewish 
society produced an almost tragic emptiness. 
That is the internal effect. The external 
[59} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

effect 1 see in the status which a human group 
can attain only by collective and productive 
work I believe that the existence of a Jew- 
ish cultural centre will strengthen the moral 
and political position of the Jews all over the 
world, by virtue of the very fact that there 
will be in existence a kind of embodiment of 
the interests of the whole Jewish people. 

(1927) 

II 

The Hebrew University in Jerusalem is to 
be organised in such a way as to meet the 
existing requirements of the country for scien- 
tific research institutes. It cannot be com- 
pared in its initial stages with a fully 
equipped University in the West. It must 
begin with a number of research institutes 
devoted to the scientific investigation of the 
natural conditions of Palestine. The first to 
be considered will be an Institute of Agri- 
culture, and then probably a Chemical Insti- 
[60] 



THE JEWS AND PALESTINE 

tute. These Institutes must be in the closest 
touch with existing and future experimental 
stations and agricultural schools. The next 
most urgent need is for an Institute o Micro- 
biology, which on the practical side of its 
activities will help to fight epidemics in Pal- 
estine. Then for one of the early foundations 
we have to consider an Institute of Oriental 
Studies, which will have for its province the 
scientific exploration of the country and its 
historical monuments, and the philological 
study of its languages, Hebrew and Arabic, 
and possibly of other Oriental languages as 
well. These Institutes will lay the foundation 
of scientific research work in Palestine. For 
the present there is less need for actual teach- 
ing by professors and lecturers. Indeed, it is 
positively undesirable to encourage the Jew- 
ish population of Palestine, which as yet is 
very smaE and can grow but slowly, to repeat 
the old mistake of one-sided devotion to the 
professions and intellectual pursuits. On the 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

contrary, the thing to aim at Is a normal dis- 
tribution of the Jewish population among the 
various occupations. The notorious one- 
sidedness of the occupational distribution of 
the Jews in the Diaspora must not be repro- 
duced in Palestine. Only with an increase of 
the population will there be a gradual exten- 
sion of the University, and a gradual addi- 
tion of teaching activities to pure research 
work. 

Due consideration must, however, also be 
given to the possibility that from the outset 
Jewish students will be attracted to the He- 
brew University from all over the world. To 
what extent this tendency should be encour- 
aged in the early stages is a problem requir- 
ing special consideration. But it is at any 
rate permissible to hope that in the course 
of time the Jerusalem University will grow 
into a centre of Jewish intellectual life, which 
will be of value not for Jews alone. 

(1921) 
62} 



THE JEWS AND PALESTINE 

m 

A University is a place in which the uni- 
versality of the human spirit finds self-expres- 
sion. Science and investigation recognise as 
their aim the truth and nothing but the truth, 
It is natural, therefore, that institutions which 
serve the interests of science should be a fac- 
tor making for the union of nations and men. 
Unfortunately, the Universities of Europe 
to-day are for the most part nurseries of 
chauvinism and of a blind intolerance of all 
things foreign to the particular nation or 
race, of all things bearing the stamp of a 
different Individuajfcpwl Under this regime 
the Jews are tfie principal sufferers, not only 
because they are thwarted in their desire for 
free participation and in their striving for 
education, but also because most Jews find 
themselves particularly cramped in this spirit 
of narrow nationalism. On this occasion of 
the birth of our University, I should like to 
63} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

express the hope that our University will al- 
ways be free from this evil, that teachers and 
students will always preserve the conscious- 
ness that they serve their people best when 
they maintain its union with humanity and 
with the highest human values. 

Jewish nationalism is a necessity to-day, 
because only through a consolidation of our 
national life can we eliminate those conflicts 
from which the Jews suffer at the present 
time. Let us hope that the time will soon 
come when this nationalism will have become 
so thoroughly a matter of course that it will 
no longer be necessary for us to give it spe- 
cial emphasis. Our affiliation with our past 
and with the present-day achievements of our 
people inspires us with assurance and pride 
in the face of the whole world. But our 
educational institutions in particular must 
regard it as one of their noblest tasks to keep 
our people free from nationalistic obscurant- 
ism and aggressive intolerance. 
[641 



THE JEWS AND PALESTINE 

Our University is still a modest undertak- 
ing. It is quite the correct policy to begin 
with a number of research institutes, out of 
which the University will develop naturally 
and organically. I am convinced that this 
development will make rapid progress, and 
that in the course of time this institution will 
demonstrate with the greatest clearness the 
achievements of which the Jewish spirit is 
capable. 

A special task devolves upon the Univer- 
sity in the spiritual direction and education of 
the labouring sections of our people in the 
land. In Palestine it is not our aim to create 
another people of city-dwellers, leading the 
same life as in the European cities, and gov- 
erned by the standards and conceptions of 
the European bourgeoisie. We aim at creat- 
ing a people of workers, at creating the Jew- 
ish village in the first place, and we desire 
that the treasures of culture should be acces- 
sible to our labouring class, especially since, 
[65} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

as we know, Jews in all circumstances place 
education above aE else. In this connection 
it devolves upon the University to create 
something unique in order to serve the spe- 
cific needs of the forms of life developed by 
our people in Palestine. 

All of us desire to co-operate in order that 
the University may accomplish its mission. 
When the significance of this cause is real- 
ised by the Jewish masses, our University 
will develop speedily into a great spiritual 
centre, which will evoke the respect of cul- 
tured mankind the world over. (1925) 



JEW AND ARAB 



JEW AND ARAB 



SHAKEN to its depths by the tragic catas- 
trophe in Palestine, Jewry must now show 
that it is truly equal to the great task it has 
undertaken. It goes without saying that our 
devotion to the cause and our determination 
to continue the work of peaceful construction 
will not be weakened in the slightest by any 
such set-back. But what has to be done to 
obviate any possibility of a recurrence of such. 
horrors? 

The first and most important necessity is 
the creation of a modus vwendi with the 
Arab people. Friction is perhaps inevitable, 
but its evil consequences must be overcome 
by organised cooperation, so that the inflam- 
mable material may not be piled up to the 
point of danger. The absence of normal con- 

>} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

tact in every-day life is bound to produce an 
atmosphere of mutual fear and distrust, 
which is favourable to such lamentable out- 
bursts of passion as we have witnessed. We 
Jews must show above all that out own his- 
tory of suffering has given us sufficient under- 
standing and psychological insight to know 
how to cope with this problem of psychology 
and organisation: the more so as no irrecon- 
cilable differences stand in the way of peace 
between Jews and Arabs in Palestine. Let us 
therefore above all be on our guard against 
blind chauvinism of any kind, and let us not 
imagine that reason and common-sense can 
be replaced by British bayonets. 

But one demand we must certainly make 
of the Mandatory Power, which is responsible 
for the well-being o the country. Adequate 
protection must be afforded to those who are 
engaged in peaceful work. The measures de- 
vised for their protection must have regard 
on the one hand to the scattered position of 
[70] 



JEW AND ARAB 

the Jewish settlements, and on die other hand 
to the need for helping to smooth over na- 
tional differences. It goes without saying that 
there must be adequate participation of Jews 
in the police force. The Mandatory Power 
cannot escape the reproach that this duty has 
not been fully carried out, quite apart from 
the f act that the responsible authorities mis- 
judged the true state of affairs in the country. 
The greatest danger in the present situation 
is that blind chauvinism may gain ground in 
our ranks. However firm the stand we make 
for the defence of our lives and property, we 
must not forget for a single moment that our 
national task is in its essence a supra-national 
matter, and that the strength of our whole 
movement rests in its moral justification, with 
which it must stand or fall. (Aug. 1929) 

n 

It was with a wonderful enthusiasm and a 
deep sense of gratitude that the Jews, af- 
[71} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

fliaed more than any other people by the 
chaos and honor of the war, obtained from 
Great Britain a pledge to support the re- 
establishment of the Jewish national home 
in Palestine. The Jewish people, beset with 
a thousand physical wrongs and moral degra- 
dations, saw in the British promise the sure 
rock on which it could re-create a Jewish 
national life in Palestine, which, by its very 
existence as well as by its material and intel- 
lectual achievements, would give the Jewish 
masses, dispersed all over the world, a new 
sense of hope, dignity, and pride. Jews of 
all lands gave of their best in man-power 
and in material wealth in order to fulfil the 
inspiration that had kept the race alive 
through a martyrdom of centuries* Within 
a brief decade some 10,000,000 were raised 
by voluntary contributions, and 100,000 
picked Jews entered Palestine to redeem by 
their physical labour the almost derelict land. 
Deserts were irrigated, forests planted, 
72} 



JEW AND 

swamps drained, and their crippling diseases 
subdued. A work of peace was created which, 
although still perhaps smaE in size, com- 
pelled the admiration of every observer. 

Has the rock on which we have built begun 
to shake? A considerable section of the 
British press now meets our aspirations with 
lack of understanding, with coldness, and 
with disfavour. "What has happened? 

Arab mobs* organised and fanaticised by 
political intriguers working on the religious 
fury of the ignorant, attacked scattered Jew- 
ish settlements and murdered and plundered 
wherever no resistance was offered. In 
Hebron, the inmates of a rabbinical college, 
innocent youths who had never handled 
weapons in their lives, were butchered in 
cold blood; in Safed the same fate befell 
aged rabbis and their wives and children. 
Recently some Arabs raided a Jewish orphan 
settlement where the pathetic remnants of 
the great Russian pogroms had found a haven 

[73] 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

of refuge. Is it not then amazing that an 
orgy of such primitive brutality upon a peace- 
ful population has been utilised by a certain 
section of the British press for a campaign 
of propaganda directed, not against the 
authors and instigators of these brutalities, 
but against their victims? 

No less disappointing is the amazing de- 
gree of ignorance of the character and the 
achievement of Jewish reconstruction in Pal- 
estine displayed in many organs of the press. 
A decade has elapsed since the policy of the 
establishment of a Jewish national home in 
Palestine was officially endorsed by the Brit- 
ish Government with the almost unanimous 
support of the entire British press and of the 
leaders of all political parties. On the basis 
of that official recognition, which was ap- 
proved by almost every civilised Govern- 
ment, and which found its legal embodiment 
in the Palestine Mandate, Jews have sent 
thek sons and daughters and have given 
[74] 



JEW AND ARAB 

their voluntary offerings for this great work 
of peaceful reconstruction. I think it may be 
stated without fear of exaggeration that, 
except for the war efforts of the European 
nations, our generation has seen no national 
effort of such spiritual intensity and such 
heroic devotion as that which the Jews have 
shown during the last ten years in favour of 
a work of peace in Palestine. When one 
travels through the country, as I had the 
good fortune to do a few years ago, and sees 
young pioneers, men and women of mag- 
nificent intellectual and moral calibre, break- 
ing stones and building roads under the blaz- 
ing rays of the Palestinian sun; when one 
sees flourishing agricultural settlements 
shooting up from the long-deserted soil un- 
der the intensive efforts of the Jewish settlers; 
when one sees the development of water- 
power and the beginnings of an industry 
adapted to the needs and possibilities of the 
country, and, above all, the growth of an edu- 
[75] 



ABOUT 

catlonal system ranging from the kindergar- 
ten to the university, in the language of the 
Bible what observer, whatever his origin or 
faith, can fail to be seized by the magic of 
such amazing achievement and of such al- 
most superhuman devotion? Is it not bewil- 
dering that, after all this, brutal massacres by 
a f anaticised mob can destroy all appreciation 
of the Jewish effort in Palestine and lead to 
a demand for the repeal of the solemn 
pledges of official support and protection? 

Zionism has a two-fold basis. It arose on 
the one hand from the fact of Jewish suffer- 
ing. It is not my intention to paint here a 
picture of the Jewish martyrdom throughout 
the ages, which has arisen from the home- 
lessness of the Jew. Even to-day there is an 
intensity of Jewish suffering throughout the 
world of which the public opinion of the 
civilised West never obtains a comprehensive 
view. In the whole of Eastern Europe the 
danger of physical attack against the indi- 
[76] 



JEW AND 

vicinal Jew is constantly present. The de- 
grading disabilities of old have been 
transformed into restrictions o an economic 
character, while restrictive measures in the 
educational sphere, such as the ct numems 
clausus" at the universities, seek to suppress 
the Jew in the world of intellectual life. 
There is, 1 am sure, no need to stress at this 
time of day that there is a Jewish problem in 
the Western world also. How many non- 
Jews have any insight into the spiritual suf- 
fering and distortion, the degradation and 
moral disintegration engendered by the mere 
fact of the homelessness of a gifted and 
sensitive people? What underlies all these 
phenomena is the basic fact, which the first 
Zionists recognised with profound intuition, 
that the Jewish problem cannot be solved by 
the assimilation of the individual Jew to his 
environment. Jewish individuality is too 
strong to be effaced by such assimilation, and 
too conscious to be ready for such self-eff ace- 
[77] 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

meat. It is, of course, clear that It will never 
be possible to transplant to Palestine any- 
thing more than a minority of the Jewish 
people, but it has for a long time been the 
deep conviction of enlightened students of 
the problem,, Jews and non-Jews alike, that 
the establishment of a National Home for the 
Jewish people in Palestine would raise the 
status and the dignity of those who would 
remain in their native countries, and would 
thereby materially assist in improving the 
relations between non-Jews and Jews in 
generaL 

But Zionism springs from an even deeper 
motive than Jewish suffering. It is rooted 
in a Jewish spiritual tradition, whose mainte- 
nance and development are for Jews the 
raison d'etre of their continued existence as 
a community. In the re-establishment of the 
Jewish nation in the ancient home of the 
race, where Jewish spiritual values could 
again be developed in a Jewish atmosphere, 
[78] 



JEW AND ARAB 

the most enlightened representatives of Jew- 
ish individuality see the essential preliminary 
to the regeneration of the race and the setting 
free of its spiritual creativeness. 

It is by these tendencies and aspirations 
that the Jewish reconstruction in Palestine is 
informed. Zionism is not a movement in- 
spired by chauvinism or by a sacfo egoismo. 
I am convinced that the great majority of the 
Jews would refuse to support a movement of 
that kind. Nor does Zionism aspire to divest 
anyone in Palestine of any rights or posses- 
sions he may enjoy. On the contrary, we are 
convinced that we shall be able to establish 
a friendly and constructive co-operation with 
the kindred Arab race which will be a bless- 
ing to both sections of the population mate- 
rially and spiritually. During the whole of 
the work of Jewish colonisation not a single 
Arab has been dispossessed; every acre of 
land acquired by the Jews has been bought 
at a price fixed by buyer and seller. Indeed, 
[79} 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

every visitor has testified to the enormous 
improvement in the economic and sanitary 
standard of the Arab population resulting 
from the Jewish colonisation. Friendly per- 
sonal relations between the Jewish settle- 
ments and the neighbouring Arab villages 
have been formed throughout die country. 
Jewish and Arab workers have associated in 
the trade unions of the Palestine railways, 
and the standard of living of the Arabs has 
been raised. Arab scholars can be found 
working in the great library of the Hebrew 
University, while the study of the Arabic 
language and civilisation forms one of the 
chief subjects of study at this University. 
Arab workmen have participated in the eve- 
ning courses conducted at the Jewish Techni- 
cal Institute at Haifa. The native population 
has come to realise in an ever-growing meas- 
ure the benefits, economic, sanitary and intel- 
lectual, which the Jewish work of reconstruc- 
tion has bestowed on the whole country and 



JEW AND ARAB 

all Its inhabitants. Indeed, one of the most 
comforting features in the present crisis has 
been the reports of personal protection af- 
forded by Arabs to their Jewish fellow-citi- 
zens against the attacks of the fanatlclsed 
mob. 

I submit, therefore, that the Zionist move- 
ment Is entitled, In the name of Its higher 
objectives and on the strength of the support 
which has been promised to It most solemnly 
by the civilised world, to demand that its 
unprecedented reconstructive effort carried 
out In a country which still largely lies fal- 
low, and in which, by methods of Intensive 
cultivation such as the Jews have applied, 
room can be found for hundreds of thousands 
of new settlers without detriment to the na- 
tive population shall not be defeated by a 
small clique of agitators, even If they wear 
the garb of ministers of the Islamic religion. 
Does public opinion in Great Britain realise 
that the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, who is 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

the centre of all the trouble, and speaks so 
loudly in the name of all the Moslems, is a 
young political adventurer of not much more, 
I understand, than thirty years of age, who in 
1920 was sentenced to several years' impris- 
onment for his complicity in the riots of that 
year, but was pardoned under the terms of 
an amnesty? The mentality of this man may 
be gauged from a recent statement he gave 
to an interviewer accusing me, of all men, of 
having demanded the rebuilding of the Tem- 
ple on the site of the Mosque of Omar. Is it 
tolerable that, in a country where ignorant 
fanaticism can so easily be incited to rapine 
and murder by interested agitators, so utterly 
irresponsible and unscrupulous a politician 
should be enabled to continue to exercise his 
evil influence, garbed in all the spiritual sanc- 
tity of religion, and invested with all the 
temporal powers that this involves in an 
Eastern country? 
The realisation of the great aims embodied 

[82] 



JEW AND ARAB 

in the Mandate for Palestine depends to a 
very large degree on the public opinion of 
Great Britain, on its press, and on its states- 
men. The Jewish people is entitled to expect 
that its work of peace shall receive the active 
and benevolent support of the Mandatory 
Power. It is entitled to demand that those 
found guilty in the recent riots shall be ade- 
quately punished, and that the men in whose 
hands is laid the responsible task of the ad- 
ministration of a country of such a unique 
past and such unique potentialities for the 
future shall be so instructed as to ensure that 
this great trust, bestowed by the civilised 
world on the Mandatory Power, is carried 
out with vision and courage in the daily tasks 
of routine administration. Jews do not wish 
to live in the land of their fathers under the 
protection of British bayonets: they come as 
friends of the kindred^Arab nation. What 
they expect of Great" Britain is that it shall 
promote the growth of friendly relations be- 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

tween Jews and Arabs, that It shall not 
tolerate poisonous propaganda, and that It 
shall create such organs of security In the 
country as will afford adequate protection to 
life and peaceful labour. 

The Jews will never abandon the work of 
reconstruction which they have undertaken. 
The reaction of all Jews, Zionist and non- 
Zionist alike, to the events of the last few 
weeks has shown this clearly enough. But it 
lies in the hands of the Mandatory Power 
materially to further or materially to hamper 
the progress of the work. It is of fundamen- 
tal importance that British public opinion 
and the Governments of Great Britain and of 
Palestine shall feel themselves responsible for 
this great trust, not because Great Britain 
once undertook this responsibility In legal 
form, but because they are deeply convinced 
of the significance and importance of the 
task, and believe that its realisation will tend 
to promote the progress and the peace of 
[84] 



JEW AND ARAB 

mankind, and to right a great historic wrong. 
I cannot believe that the greatest colonial 
Power in the world will fail when it is faced 
with the task of placing its unique colonising 
experience at the service of the reconstruc- 
tion of the ancient home of the People of the 
Bible. The task may not be an easy one for 
the Mandatory Power, but for the success it 
will attain it is assured of the undying grati- 
tude not only of the Jews but of all that is 
noblest in mankind. 

(Letter to the Manchester Guardian, 12 
Oct. 1929) 

in 

One who 5 like myself, has cherished for 
many years the conviction that the humanity 
of the future must be built up on an intimate 
community of the nations, and that aggres- 
sive nationalism must be conquered, can see 
a future for Palestine only on the basis of 
peaceful cooperation between the two peo- 



ABOUT ZIONISM 

pies who are at home In the country. For 
this reason 1 should have expected that the 
great Arab people will show a truer appre- 
ciation of the need which the Jews feel to 
re-build their national home in the ancient 
seat of Judaism; I should have expected that 
by common effort ways and means would be 
found to render possible an extensive Jewish 
settlement in the country. I am convinced 
that the devotion of the Jewish people to 
Palestine will benefit all the inhabitants of 
the country, not only materially, but also cul- 
turally and nationally. I believe that the Arab 
renaissance in the vast expanse of territory 
now occupied by the Arabs stands only to 
gain from Jewish sympathy. I should wel- 
come the creation of an opportunity for abso- 
lutely free and frank discussion of these pos- 
sibilities, for I believe that the two great 
Semitic peoples, each of which has in its way 
contributed something of lasting value to the 
civilisation of the West, may have a great 



JEW AND ARAB 

future in common, and that instead of facing 
each other with barren enmity and mutual 
distrust, they should support each other's 
national and cultural endeavours, and should 
seek the possibility of sympathetic co-opera- 
tion. I think that those who are not actively 
engaged in politics should above aU con- 
tribute to the creation of this atmosphere of 
confidence. 

I deplore the tragic events of last August 
not only because they revealed human nature 
in its lowest aspects, but also because they 
have estranged the two peoples and have 
made it temporarily more difficult for them 
to approach one another. But come together 
they must, in spite of all. 

(Letter to the Palestinian Arab Paper 

Falastin, 28 January 1930) 



87] 



SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 



SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 

AHAD HA- AM ( Asher Glnzberg) : Ten Essays 

on Zionism and Judaism. 
BALFOUR, EARL OF: Speeches on Zionism* 
BRAVER: Hand Book of Palestine. 
COHEN, ISRAEL: Jewish Ufe in Modern Times. 

The Journal of a Jewish Traveller. 

Erez Israel: The Jewish National Fund 

Year Book. 

CONWAY, SIR MARTIN: Palestine and Morocco. 
GOLDING, Louis: Those Ancient Lands. 
GOODMAN, PAUL, and ARTHUR D. LEWIS 

(edited by) : Zionism: Problems and 

Views. 

GOTTESMAN, LEO: The Maftjrs of Hebron. 
GOTTHEIL, RICHARD: Zionism. 
GRANOVSKY, A.: Land Problems in Palestine. 

Land Settlement in Palestine. 

GSAVES, PHTT.IP: Land of Three Faiths. 
HAAS, JACOB DE: Theodor HerzL 
^^ Louis D. Brandeis. 
HERZL, THEODOR: A Jewish State. 
[91] 



SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 

HESS S MOSES: Rome and Jerusalem. 
HOLMES, JOHN HAYNES: Palestine To-day and 

To-morrow. 
HOROWITZ, PHINEAS: Zionism and the Jewish 

Question. 
HYAMSON, ALBERT M.: Palestine Old and 

New. 
LEVIN, SCHMARIA: Childhood in Exile. 

Out of Bondage. 

LEWISOHN, LUDWIG: Israel. 
LINDHEIM, IRMA L. : The Immortal Adventure. 
LOEB, SOPHIE IRENE: Palestine Awake. 
MACALISTER, R.A.S.: A History of Civilization 

in Palestine, 

A Century of Excavation in Palestine. 

PATTERSON, J. H.: With the Zionists in 

Gallipoli. 
ROACH, KEITH and LUKE., CHARLES: Hand 

Book of Palestine. 

ROSENBLATT, BERNARD: Social Zionism. 
RUPPIN, ARTHUR: Agricultural Colonisation 

in Palestine. 
SACHER, H. (edited by): Zionism and the 

Jewish Future. 
SAMPTER, JESSIE (edited by): A Guide to 

Zionism. 

[92] 



SELECT 

SAMUEL, MAURICE: What Happened in 
Palestine. 

SIDEBOTHAN, HERBERT: England and Pales- 
tine. 

SIMON, LEON and STEIN, LEONARD (edited 
by) : Awakening Palestine. 

SIMON, LEON; Studies in Jewish Nationalism. 

SMITH, GEORGE ADAM: Historical Geography 
of Palestine & Syria. 

SOKOLOW, NAHUM: History of Zionism. 1600- 
1918. 

SPIEGEL, SHALOM: Hebrew Reborn. 

STEIN, LEONARD: Memorandum on the "Re- 
port of the Commission on the Palestine 
Disturbances of August, 1929? 9 

Zionism. 

STOYANOVSKY, J,: The Mandate for Palestine. 

TRACER, HANNAH: Pioneers in Palestine. 

WALDSTEIN, ABRAHAM S.: Modem Palestine. 

WISE, STEPHEN S. and DE HAAS, JACOB: The 
Great Betrayal. 

WORSFOLD, W. BASIL: Palestine of the 
Mandate, 

REPORTS AND PAMPHLETS: Report of the 
Executive of the Zionist Organization 
to the XII Congress. 
[93} 



SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Report of the Executive of the Zionist 

Organization to the XIII Congress. 

Report of the Executive of the Zionist 

Organization to the XIV Congress. Ob- 
tainable from the Central Office of the 
Zionist Organization, London. 

Reports on Palestine Administration, 1920- 
1929, Issued by H. M, Stationery Office. 



[94] 



130280 



