)W? 



t 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2007 with funding from 

IVIicrosoft Corporation 



http://www.archive.org/details/essayonbestmeansOOhumbrich 



AN ESSAY 

BEST MEANS OF ASCERTAINING //iT^^t^ 



AFFINITIES OF ORIENTAL LANGUAGES; 



BARON WILLIAM HUMBOLDT, 

For. M.R.A.S. 



COKTAINED IN 

A LETTER ADDRESSED TO SIR ALEXANDER JOHNSTON, KNT., 

V.P.R.A.S. 



{From the Transactmis of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain 

and Ireland^ Vol. II.) 



LONDON: 

PRINTED BY J. L. COX, PRINTER TO THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY, 

Great QMeen Street, Lincoln s-Inn Fields. 

1828. 



( 3 ) 



XII. A?i Essay on the best Means of ascertaining the Affinities of Oriental 
Languages, by Baron William Humboldt, For. M.R.A.S. Contained in 
a Letter addressed to Sir Alexander Johnston, Knt., V.P.R.A.S. 

Read June 14, 1828. 
Sir : 

I have the honour to return you Sir James Mackintosh's interesting 
memoir. It possesses (like every thing which comes from the pen of that 
gifted and ingenious writer) the highest interest ; and the ideas which are 
so luminously developed in it have the more merit, if we consider, that, at 
the period when this memoir was published, philosophical notions on the 
study and nature of languages were rarer and more novel than they are at 
present. 

I would, in the first place, observe, that the Royal Asiatic Society 
could not direct its efforts to a point more important, and more in- 
timately connected with the national glory, than that of endeavouring 
to throw further light on the relations which subsist among the different 
Indian dialects. Since we cannot doubt that this part of Asia was the 
cradle of the arts and sciences at an extremely remote period, it would be 
highly interesting to ascertain with greater certainty whether the Sanscrit 
be a primitive idiom belonging to those countries, or whether, on the 
contrary, as most of the learned are at present inclined to believe, it was 
introduced as a foreign language into India ; and if so, the country whence 
it originated would naturally follow in the course of inquiry. It is equally 
curious to determine whether the primitive languages of India are to be 
traced over the Indian archipelago in dialects differing little from each 
other, and whether we are to assign their origin to these islands or to the 
continent. Mr. Ellis's paper on the Malayalam language, with which you 
were so good as to furnish me, contains assertions on the affinity of the 
Tamul language to the idioms of Java, which it would be very important to 
verify. 

A2 



4 Baron Humboldt*^ Essay on the Oriental Languages. 

It must be confessed that these problems are extremely difficult to solve ; 
and it is probable that we shall never arrive at results which are quite 
certain : we "should, however, carry these researches as far as possible, and 
the difficulty of the undertaking ought not to deter, but rather to induce 
us to select the most solid and certain means of insuring success. This is 
more particularly the point to which I wish to direct your attention, 
since you have been pleased to ask my opinion respecting the methods 
proposed by Sir James Mackintosh. It would assuredly have been very 
desirable to execute his plan, at the period when it was formed ; we should 
then by this time have had more complete information regarding the 
languages of India ; and should perhaps have been in the possession of 
dialects, of the existence of which we are now ignorant. There do exist, 
however, some works, such as Sir James calls for. Not to mention printed 
books, I have myself seen in the library of the East-India Company a MS. 
collection of Sanscrit words, compared in great numbers with those of the 
other languages of India, made under the direction of Mr. Colebrooke.(l) 
Some distinguished authors, as for instance Mr. Campbell, in his Telugu 
Dictionary, have been at pains to mark from what foreign idiom such words 
are derived, as are not proper to the language of which they form a part ; 
and if these works do not embrace all the Indian idioms, they have, on the 
other hand, the advantage of comprehending entire languages, or at least 
of not being confined to a limited number of expressions. In the present 
state of our knowledge of the languages of India, which is very different 
from that of 1806, and possessing, as we now do, grammars and dictionaries 
of most of these idioms, I should not advise our confining ourselves to a 
plan which can only give a very imperfect idea of each of them. We can, 
and ought, to go farther at the present day. I confess that I am 
extremely averse to the system which proceeds on the supposition that we 
can judge of the affinity of languages merely by a certain number of ideas 
expressed in the different languages which we wish to compare. I beg you 
will not suppose, however, that I am insensible to the value and utility 
of these comparisons ; on the contrary, when they are well exQCuted, I 
appreciate all their importance ; but I can never deem them sufficient to 
answer the end for which they have been undertaken ; they certainly form 
a part of the data to be taken into account in deciding on the affinity of 
languages, but we should never be guided by them alone, if we wish to 
arrive at a solid, complete, and certain conclusion. If we w^ould make 



Baron Humboldt's Essay on the Oriental Langiiages. 5 

ourselves acquainted with the relation which subsists between two languages, 
we ought to possess a thorough and profound knowledge of each of them. 
This is a principle dictated alike by common sense and by that precision 
acquired by the habit of scientific research. 

I do not mean to say, that, if we are unable to attain a profound know- 
ledge of each idiom, we should on this account entirely suspend our judg- 
ment : I only insist on it that we should not prescribe to ourselves arbitrary 
limits, and imagine that we are forming our judgment on a firm basis, while 
it is in reality insufficient. 

The method of comparing a certain number of words of one existing 
language with those of several others, has always the two-fold inconvenience 
of neglecting entirely the grammatical relations, as if the grammar was not 
as essential a part of the language as the words ; and of taking from the 
language which we wish to examine isolated words, selected, not accord- 
ing to their affinities and natural etymology, but according to the ideas 
which they express. Sir James Mackintosh very justly observes, that the 
affinity of two languages is much better proved when whole families of 
words resemble each other, than when this is the case with single words 
only. But how shall we recognize families of words in foreign languages, 
if we only select from them two or three hundred isolated terms ? There 
undoubtedly subsists among words of the same language an analogy of mean- 
ings and forms of combination easy to be perceived. It is from this analogy, 
considered in its whole extent, and compared with the analogy of the words of 
another language, that we discover the affinity of two idioms, as far as it is 
recognizable in their vocabularies. It is in this manner alone, that we 
recognize the roots and the methods by which each language forms its 
derivatives. The comparison of two languages requires, that we should 
examine whether, and in what degree, the roots and derivative terms are 
common to both. It is not, then, by terms expressive of general ideas ; such 
as sun, moon, man, woman, &c., that we must commence the comparison 
of two languages, but by their entire dictionary critically explained. The 
simple comparison of a certain number of words, by reducing the exami- 
nation of languages too much to a mere mechanical labour, often leads us 
to omit examining sufficiently the words which form the subjects of our 
comparison ; and to avoid this defect, we are forced to enter deeply into all 
the minutiae of grammar, separating the words from their grammatical 
affixes, and comparing only what is really essential to the expression of the 



6 Baron Humboldt's Essay on the Oriental Languages. 

idea which they represent. The words, of which we seek a translation in 
different languages, often cannot be rendered except by a compound term. 
Thus the sun in some languages is called the father, the author, the star, 
&c. of day. It is evident, that, in these cases, we no longer compare the 
same words, but words altogether different. To conclude : it is impossible 
to form a correct judgment on the resemblance of sounds without having 
carefully studied the system of sounds of each of the languages which we 
would compare. There occur often between different languages, and still 
more frequently between different dialects, regular transformations of letters, 
by which we can discover the identity of words that at first view seem to 
have but a very slight resemblance in sound. On the other hand, a great 
resemblance of sound in two words will sometimes prove nothing, or leave 
the judgment in great uncertainty, if it be not supported by a train of 
analogies for the permutation of the same letters. What I have remarked 
proves, as I think, that even if we confine ourselves to the comparison of 
a certain number of words in different languages, it is still necessary to 
enter more deeply into their structure, and to apply ourselves to the study 
of their grammar. But further, I am quite convinced that it is only by 
an accurate examination of the grammar of languages that we can pro- 
nounce a decisive judgment on their true affinities. 

Languages are the true images of the modes in which nations think and 
combine their ideas. The manner of this combination represented by the 
grammar, is altogether as essential and characteristic as are the sounds 
applied to objects, that is to say, the words. The form of language being 
quite inherent in the intellectual faculties of nations, it is very natural that 
one generation should transmit theirs to that which follows it ; while words, 
being simple signs of ideas, may be adopted by races altogether distinct. 
If I attach great importance, however, under this view, to the grammar of 
a language, I do not refer to the system of grammar in general, but to 
gi'ammatical forms, considered with respect to their system and their sounds 
taken conjointly. 

If two languages, such for instance as the Sanscrit and the Greek, exhibit 
grammatical forms which are identical in arrangement, and have a close 
analogy in their sounds, we have an incontestable proof that these two 
languages belong to the same family. 

If, on the contrary, two languages do contain a great number of words 
in common, but have no grammatical identity, their affinity becomes a 



Baron Humboldt* s Essay on the Oriental Languages, 7 

matter of great doubt ; and if their grammars have, like those of the 
Basque and the Latin, an essentially different character, these two languages 
certainly do not belong to the same family. The words of the one have 
been merely transplanted into the other, which has nevertheless retained its 
primitive forms. 

If I assert that, in order to prove the affinity of languages, we should 
pay attention to the employment of grammatical forms and to their sounds 
taken together, it is because I would affirm that they must be considered not 
only in the abstract but in the concrete. Some examples will render this 
clearer. 

Several American languages have two plural forms in the first person, an 
exclusive and an inclusive form, according as we would include or exclude 
the person addressed. It has been thought that this peculiarity belonged 
exclusively to the American languages ; but it is also found in the Mantchu, 
the Tamul, and in all the dialects of the South Sea Islands. All these 
languages have indeed this grammatical form in common ; but it is only in 
the abstract. Each of them expresses it by a different sound : the identity 
of this form, therefore, does not furnish any proof of the affinity of these 
languages. 

On the other hand, tlie Sanscrit infinitive, or rather the affixes ^ and r{, 

as in %rf^JJJ{' " desirous of vanquishing," correspond as grammatical 

forms with the Latin supines^ and there is at the same time a perfect identity 
of sound in these forms in the two languages, as the Latin supines terminate 
invariably in turn and tu. The striking conformity of the Sanscrit auxiliary 
verb to that of the Greek and Lithuanian languages, has been ingeniously 

developed by Professor Bopp. The Sanscrit q-^, the Greek ollx, and the 

Gothic vaity are evidently of the same origin. In all these three words there 
is a conformity both of sound and signification : but further ; all the three 
verbal forms have these two peculiarities in common, that though preterites, 
they are used in a present sense, and that in all three the short radical 
vowel, which is retained in the plural, is changed to a long vowel in the 
singular. The Lithuanian weizdmi, I knou\ and the Sanscrit q"f||", shew 

clearly at first view that this word is not only the same in the two 
languages (as hos and heef in Latin and English), but that the two lan- 
guages have, in the termination mU modelled these words on the same 



8 Baron Humboldt's Essay on the Oriental Languages. 

grammatical form ; for they not only mark the persons of the verb by 
inflexions added to the end of the root, but the affix of the first person 
singular is in both cases the syllable mi. 

There is then in the examples adduced a conformity in grammatical 
use, and at the same time in sound ; and it is impossible to deny that the 
languages which possess these forms must be of the same family. 

The difference between the real affinity of languages, which presumes a 
filiation as it were among the nations who speak them, and that degree of 
relation which is purely historical, and only indicates temporary and ac- 
cidental connexions among nations, is, in my opinion, of the greatest 
importance. Now it appears to me impossible ever to ascertain that difference 
merely by the examination of words ; especially, if we examine but a small 
number of them. 

It is perhaps too much to assert, that words pass from age to age and 
from nation to nation ; that they arise also from connexions (which though 
secret, are common to all men) between sounds and objects, and that they 
thus establish a certain identity between all languages ; while the manner 
of casting and arranging these words, that is to say, the grammar, con- 
stitutes the particular differences of dialects. This assertion, I repeat, is 
perhaps too bold, when expressed in this general way ; yet I am strongly 
inclined to consider it correct, provided the expression grammar be not 
taken vaguely, but with a due regard to the sounds of grammatical forms. 
But whatever opinion may be entertained with *" respect to this manner of 
considering the difference of languages, it appears to me at all events 
demonstrated : 

First, that all research into the affinity of languages, which does not 
enter quite as much into the examination of the grammatical system as into 
that of words, is faulty and imperfect ; and, 

Secondly, that the proofs of the real affinity of languages, that is to 
say, the question whether two languages belong to the same family, ought 
to be principally deduced from the grammatical system, and can be deduced 
from that alone ; since the identity of words only proves a resemblance 
such as may be purely historical and accidental. 

Sir James Mackintosh rejects the examination of grammar, for this 
reason, that languages which are evidently of the same stock have very 
different grammars. But we must not be misled by this phenomenon, although 
it is in itself quite true. The grammatical form of languages depends, on the 



Baron Humboldt^s Essay on the Oriental Languages, 9 

one hand, it is true, upon the nature of these languages; but it also depends, 
on the other hand, upon the changes which they experience in the course 
of ages, and in consequence of historical revolutions. Out of these 
changes it has arisen, that languages of the same family have a different 
grammatical system, and that languages really distinct resemble each other 
in some degree. But the slightest examination will suffice to shew the real 
relati^ons which subsist between those languages, especially if by following 
the plan above laid down we proceed to the examination of forms which 
ai'e alike identical in their uses and in their sounds. It is thus that we 
discover without difficulty that the English language is of Germanic origin, 
and that the Persian belongs to the Sanscrit family of languages, notwith- 
standing the very great diffiirence which exists between the gramjnars of 
these idioms. 

It is generally believed, that the affinity of two languages is undeniably 
proved, if words that are applied to objects which must have been known 
to the natives ever since their existence, exhibit a great degree of resem- 
blance, and to a certain extent this is correct. But, notwithstanding this, 
such a method of judging of the affinity of languages seems to me by no 
means infallible. It often happens, that even the objects of our earliest 
perceptions, or of the first necessity, are represented by words taken from 
foreign languages, and which belong to a different class. If we only 
examine the list furnished by Sir James Mackintosh, we shall find there 
such words as people^ countenance^ touch, voice, labour, force, pouter, 
marriage, spirit, circle, tempest, autumn, time, mountain, valley, air, vapour, 
herb, verdure, and others of the same kind. Now all these words being 
evidently derived from the Latin, as it was transformed after the fall of the 
Roman empire, we ought, judging from these words, rather to assign to the 
English an origin similar to that of the Roman languages than to that of 
the German. 

If what I have here advanced be well founded, it appears to me easy to 
point out the system which the Royal Asiatic Society would do well to 
pursue, in order to complete our knowledge of the Indian languages, and 
to resolve the grand problem which they present to the minds of philologists 
who endeavour to discover the origin and the filiation of languages. 

It would be proper to commence by examining the country geogra- 
phically, taking a review of every part of India, in order to know exactly 
in what parts we are still in want of sufficient materials to determine the 

B 



10 Baro?i Humboldt's Essay on the Oriental Languages. 

nature of their idioms. Wiiere deficiencies are discovered, efforts should 
be used for their supply, by encouraging those persons who are already 
employed on those languages, or may intend studying them, to form gram- 
mars and dictionaries, and to publish the principal works existing in 
these languages, for which every facility should be afforded them. If 
materials to a certain extent were thus collected, we should unquestionably 
not want men who would be able to deduce from them conclusions from 
which to prepare a critical view of the affinity of the Indian languages, and 
to determine, as far as the data which we might possess would admit, the 
manner in which the Sanscrit and other languages of India and its islands 
have reciprocally acted upon each other. I assume that the learned of the 
Continent would take their share in this work, M. E. Burnouf, of Paris, 
having already commenced a series of papers on the subject in the Nouveau 
Journal Asiatigue, 

There exists in England a vast quantity of manuscript materials relating 
to these languages. Dr. B. Babington, for instance, possesses alphabets 
altogether unknown in Europe up to the present time. In England, also, the 
great advantage is possessed of being able to direct works upon these lan- 
guages to be undertaken in India itself, and to guide such labours by plans 
sent from this country. In India these are living languages, and literary men 
of the very nations in which they are spoken may be employed in the 
researches we wish to forward. No other nation possesses so valuable an 
advantage. It is important to profit by it. The deficiencies in our knowledge 
are numerous and evident. We possess scarcely any thing upon theMalayalim ; 
and are in want of a printed dictionary of the Tamul. But while we keep 
this object strictly in view, and work upon a fixed plan, we shall insensibly 
fill up these vacancies. It is certainly difficult to find men who both can 
and will engage in a work like this, but they are undoubtedly to be 
found. Thus Dr. Babington has mentioned Mr. Whish to me, as being 
profoundly acquainted with the Malayalim, and as being already employed 
in making it better known in Europe. Solid labours upon languages are, 
in their nature, slow. In an enterprize so vast as that of examining to the 
utmost possible extent each of the numerous languages of India, progress 
can only be made insensibly and step by step. But learned societies afford 
this advantage, that the same labour can be continued through a long series 
of years ; and complete and perfect works upon two or three idioms arc 
certainly preferable to notions, more or less superficial, upon all the dialects 



Baron Humboldt's Essay on the Oriental Languages. 1 1 

of India, hastily put forth for the purpose of coming at once to a general 
conclusion. 

These, Sir, are my ideas upon the subject, upon which you wished to 
have my opinion. It is only in compliance with your request, that I have 
ventured to lay them before you ; for I am well aware how much better 
able the distinguished members of the Royal Asiatic Society are to form 
a judgment of, and give an opinion upon, this matter than I am. 

I request you, Sir, to accept the assurance of my highest respect. 

{Signed) Humboldt. 
London, June 10, 1828. 



NOTE. 

(I) The work to which allusion is made by Baron William de Humboldt, in the 
passage where I am named, was undertaken by me in furtherance of the views developed 
by Sir James Mackintosh. I thought that a more copious comparative vocabulary than 
he had proposed, would be practically useful ; and would be instructive in more points 
of view than he had contemplated. Accordingly, at my instance, a Sanscrit vocabulary 
and a Persian one were printed with blank half pages, and distributed among gentle- 
men, whose situations were considered to afford the opportunity of having the blank 
column filled up, by competent persons, with a vocabulary of a provincial language. 
Vocabularies of the same vernacular tongue by a Pandit and a Munshi, would serve 
to correct mutually, and complete the information sought from them. Very few 
answers, however, were received : indeed scarcely any, except from Dr. Buchanan 
Hamilton. The compilation, to which Baron de Humboldt refers, comprises as many as 
I succeeded in collecting. 

H. T. C. 







»: •.-?' 



%:^ * 



V 






I5-?.' 



TREATMENT REPORT 

Statues of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 

AS3ttA«7S8 1823 

Condition 
The original binding was quarter-leather, with marbled paper sides. Spine was 
completely missing. There was evidence of a previous rebacking. Back and front 
endsheet were not marbled and wer separated from the text. Both boards were 
completely detached. The text is sewn on 5 sawn-in cords. One folio in the center 
of text block was never sewn in. Two pages at front and one at back were loose. 

Treatment 

- Spine was cleaned with methylcellulose. 

- Loose pages were hinged with Japanese paper (Kizukishi) and Zin Shofu paste. 

- Loose folio was sewn with linen thread- 30/2. 

■ Linen hinged handmade endsheets (Rotunda) were sewn on- 18/3 thr^d. 

- Endsheets were guarded on using Kizikishi and paste. 

- Spine lined twice overall with Kizikishi and paste. 

- Spine lined twice overall with Japanese paper (Sekishu) and paste. 

- Spine lined two times overall with handmade paper (BG9) and paste. 

- Bradel binding was made using Berkeley Blue handmade paper for the bonnet. 

- Boards were lined with bond paper and adhesive mixture. 

- Boards were covered with Berkeley Blue handmade paper, cloth, and vellum tips. 

- Text block was cased-in using adhesive mixture. 

- Twinrocker Rotunda paper was used for paste-downs and attached 
with adhesive mixture. 

- Label and treatment report were laser printed on Twinrocker Rotunda paper. 

- Label and treatment report were sprayed with a fixative (Krylon) 
and attached with adhesive mixture 

Materials 

Kizukishi Japanese paper- Barrett, University of Iowa, Iowa. 

Zin Shofu paste- Bookmakers- Riverdale, Maryland. 

Thread, 30/2 and 1 8/3- Bookmakers- Riverdale, Maryland. 

Linen- Bookmakers- Riverdale, Maryland. 

Rotunda Laid handmade paper TT/CP- Twin Rocker, Brookston, Indiana. 

Sekishu Japanese paper- Bookmakers Riverdale, Maryland. 

B9G handmade paper- Barrett- University of Iowa, Iowa. 

Berkeley Blue handmade paper- Twinrocker, Indiana. 

Permalife Bond paper- University Products- Holyoke, MA. 

Adhesive mixture- 60% PVA and 40% methylcellulose. 

Boards- Supreme Blue Conservation Board- Archivart New Jersey. 

Cloth- Cotlin Cloth- Talas- New York, NY. 



April-03 

Karen Sosa, Conservation Assistant 

Conservation Department, University of California, Berkeley 



