APDF p wi g u p ^ rr t^6% f F r 8ati»'4 p ^t^ 1 ^ fgift^i w flfm ark 

star is the subject ot a study by l-rance's 
leading female intellect. Mile, de Beauvoir 
analyses the appeal of Bardot in connection 
with the ideal of modern woman which tends 
towards the Lolita child-woman symbol. 

‘The distinguished French sociologist . . . 
has written a fascinating treatise’ — 

THE PEOPLE . 


'Something most jolly and acceptable . . . 
pictures of the head of Mile. Brigitte Bardot 
and ... of other bits of her' — 

Bernard Levin, THE SPECTATOR 




BRIGITTE 
BARDO 

and the 

LOLITA SYNDROME 


SIMONE de 
BEAUVOIR 


A FOUR SQUARE BOOK (Si) 

Published by Jhe New English Library Ltd. Vswmi/ 



MB nmmirr imimiT'i'iK?® 




WITH MANY HALF-TONE ILLUSTRATIONS 




BRIGITTE BARDOT 

AND THE 

LOLITA SYNDROME 

SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR 



THE NEW ENGLISH LIBRARY LTD. 



First published in England by Andre Deutsch Ltd. and Weidenfeld ft Nicolson Ltd. 

in 1960 

Second impression November 1960 
Translated by Bernard Fretchman 
© 1959 by Simone de Beauvoir 
English translation © 1959 by Esquire Inc. 

★ 

FIRST FOUR SQUARE EDITION 1962 


The photographs are reproduced by courtesy of: Barezzi, Civirani, Union Preuj 
Giancolombo, Publistampa, Carlo Cisventi, Photos Match, News Blitz, FarabolaJ 
Richter, Publifoto, Rapho, Franco Fedeli, Ever Foto, United Press, Aldo Palazzjj 
Editore, Settimo Giomo, The Orion Press Ltd., Arnoldo Mondadori Editore, Rizzo! 
Editore, Le Ore, Paris-Match, L’Espresso. 


Four Square Books are published by The New English Library Limited from Barnard's 
Holborn, London EC 1. They are made and printed in Great Britain by Love 
Malcomson Ltd, Redhill, Surrey 


BRIGITTE BARDOT 
AND THE LOLITA SYNDROME 
by SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR 


On New Year’s Eve, Brigitte Bardot 
appeared on French television. She was 
got up as usual — blue jeans, sweater and 
shock of tousled hair. Lounging on a sofa, 
she plucked at a guitar. ‘That’s not hard,’ 
said the women. ‘I could do just as well. 
She’s not even pretty. She has the face of a 
housemaid.’ The men couldn’t keep from 
devouring her with their eyes, but they too 
snickered. Only two or three of us, among 
thirty or so spectators, thought her charm- 
ing. Then she did an excellent classical 
dance number. ‘She can dance’, the others 
admitted grudgingly. Once again I could 
observe that Brigitte Bardot was disliked in 
her own country. 

When And God Created Woman was 
shown in first-run houses on the Champs- 
l lysees, the film, which had cost a hundred 
and forty million francs, brought in less 
than sixty. Receipts in the U.S.A. have 
come to $4,000,000, the equivalent of the 
.ale of 2,500 Dauphines. BB now deserves 
to be considered an export product as 
important as Renault automobiles. 

She is the new idol of American youth. 


5 


She ranks as a great international star. 
Nevertheless, hci Icllow countrymen con- 
tinue to shy away from hci Not a week 
goes by without articles in the press telling 
all about her recent moods and love a flairs 
or offering a new interpretation of her 
personality, but hall ol these articles and 
gossip items seethe with spile. Brigitte 
receives three hundred Ian letters a day, 
from boys and girls alike, and every day 
indignant mothers write to newspaper edi- 
tors and religious and civil authorities to 
protest against hei existence. When three 
young ne'er-do wells of reputable families 
murdered a sleeping old man in a train at 
Angers, the Parent I cachets’ Association 
denounced BB to M. C'hatcnay, the deputy- 
mayor of the city. It was she, they said, 
who was really responsible for the crime. 
And dot! ( rea led Woman had been shown 
in Angers; the young people had been 
immediately perverted. 1 am not surprised 
that professional moralists in all countries, 
even the U.S.A., have tried to have her films 
banned. It is no new thing for high-minded 
folk to identify the flesh with sin and to 
dream of making a bonfire of works of art, 
books and films that depict it complacently 
or frankly. 

But this official prudery does not explain 
the French public’s very peculiar hostility 
to BB. Martine Carol also undressed rather 


6 



generously in her hit films, and nobody 
reproached her, whereas almost everyone is 
ready to regard BB as a very monument of 
immorality. Why does this character, 
fabricated by Marc Allegret and particularly 
by Vadim, arouse such animosity? 

If we want to understand what BB 
represents, it is not important to know what 
the young woman named Brigitte Bardot is 
really like. Her admirers and detractors 
are concerned with the imaginary creature 
they see on the screen through a tremendous 
cloud of ballyhoo. In so far as she is 
exposed to the public gaze, her legend has 
been fed by her private life no less than by 
her film roles. This legend conforms to a 
very old myth that Vadim tried to rejuve- 
nate. He invented a resolutely modern 
version of ‘the eternal female’ and thereby 
launched a new type of eroticism. It is 
this novelty that entices some people and 
shocks others. 

Love can resist familiarity; eroticism 
cannot. Its role in the films dwindled 
considerably when social differences be- 
tween the two sexes diminished. Between 
1930 and 1940 it gave way to romanticism 
and sentimentality. The vamp was replaced 
by the girl friend, of whom Jean Arthur was 
the most perfect type. However, when in 
1947 the cinema was threatened with a 
serious crisis, film-makers returned to eroti- 

S 




9 



cism in an effort to win back the public’s 
affection. In an age when woman drives a 
car and speculates on the stock exchange, 
an age in which she unceremoniously 
displays her nudity on public beaches, any 
attempt to revive the vamp and her mystery 
was out of the question. The films tried to 
appeal, in a cruder way, to the male’s 
response to feminine curves. Stars were 
appreciated for the obviousness of their 
physical charms rather than for their pas- 
sionate or languorous gaze. Marilyn 
Monroe, Sophia Loren and Lollobrigida 
are ample proof of the fact that the full- 
blown woman has not lost her power over 
men. However, the dream-merchants were 
also moving in other directions. With 
Audrey Hepburn, Fran^oise Arnoul, Marina 
Vlady, Leslie Caron and Brigitte Bardot 
they invented the erotic hoyden. For a 
part in his next film. Dangerous Connections, 
Vadim has engaged a fourteen-year-old girl. 
The child-woman is triumphing not only 
in the films. In A View from the Bridge, the 
Arthur Miller play which has been a hit in 
the United States and a bigger one in 
England and France, the heroine has just 
about reached the age of puberty. Nabo- 
kov’s Lolita, which deals with the relations 
between a forty-year-old male and a ‘nym- 
phet’ of twelve, was at the top of the best- 
seller list in England and America for 


10 




11 



12 




months. The adult woman now inhabits 
the same world as the man, but the child- 
woman moves in a universe which he 
cannot enter. The age difference re-estab- 
lishes between them the distance that seems 
necessary to desire. At least that is what 
those who have created a new Eve by 
merging the ‘green fruit' and 'femme fatale 
types have pinned their hopes on. 

We shall see the reasons why they have 
not succeeded in France as well as in the 
United States. 

Brigitte Bardot is the most perfect speci- 
men of these ambiguous nymphs. Seen 
from behind, her slender, muscular, dancer’s 
body is almost androgynous. Femininity 
triumphs in her delightful bosom. The long 
voluptuous tresses of Melisande flow down 
to her shoulders, but her hair-do is that of 
a negligent waif. The line of her lips forms 
a childish pout, and at the same time those 
lips are very kissable. She goes about 
barefooted, she turns up her nose at elegant 
clothes, jewels, girdles, perfumes, make-up, 
at all artifice. Yet her walk is lascivious 
and a saint would sell his soul to the devil 
merely to watch her dance. It has often 
been said that her face has only one expres- 
sion. It is true that the outer world is 
hardly reflected in it at all and that it does 
not reveal great inner disturbance. But that 
air of indifference becomes her. BB has not 


14 




15 




17 


been marked by experience. Even if she 
has lived — as in Love Is My Profession — 
the lessons that life has given her are too 
confused for her to have learned anything 
from them. She is without memory, with- 
out a past, and, thanks to this ignorance, 
she retains the perfect innocence that is 
attributed to a mythical childhood. 

The legend that has been built up around 
Brigitte Bardot by publicity has for a long 
time identified her with this childlike and 
disturbing character. Vadim presented her 
as ‘a phenomenon of nature’. ‘She doesn’t 
act,’ he said. ‘She exists.’ ‘That’s right,’ 
confirmed BB. ‘The Juliette in And God 
Created Woman is exactly me. When I’m 
in front of the camera, I’m simply myself.’ 
Brigitte was said not to bother to use a 
comb, but to do up her hair with her fingers. 
She was said to loathe all forms of world- 
liness. Her interviews presented her as 
being natural and unpretentious. Vadim 
went even further. He painted her as naive 
to the point of absurdity. According to 
him, at the age of eighteen she thought that 
mice laid eggs. She was moody and 
capricious. At the gala performance of her 
film. Please, Mr. Balzac, the producer 
waited in vain for her to show up. At the 
last minute he informed the audience that 
she was not coming. She was described as 
a creature of instinct, as yielding blindly to 


18 




her impulses. She would suddenly take a 
dislike to the decoration of her room and 
then and there would pull down the 
hangings and start repainting the furniture. 
She is temperamental, changeable and un- 
predictable, and though she retains the 
limpidity of childhood, she has also preser- 
ved its mystery. A strange little creature, 
all in all; and this image does not depart 
from the traditional myth of femininity. 
The roles that her script-writers have offered 
her also have a conventional side. She 
appears as a force of nature, dangerous so 
long as she remains untamed, but it is up 
to the male to domesticate her. She is kind, 
she is good-hearted. In all her films she 
loves animals. If she ever makes anyone 
suffer, it is never deliberately. Her flighti- 
ness and slips of behaviour are excusable 
because she is so young and because of 
circumstances. Juliette had an unhappy 
childhood ; Yvette, in Love Is My Profession , 
is a victim of society. If they go astray, it 
is because no one has ever shown them the 
right path, but a man, a real man, can lead 
them back to it. Juliette’s young husband 
decides to act like a male, gives her a good 
sharp slap, and Juliette is all at once 
transformed into a happy, contrite and 
submissive wife. Yvette joyfully accepts 
her lover’s demand that she be faithful and 
his imposing upon her a life of virtual 


20 




21 


seclusion. With a bit of luck, this experien- 
ced, middle-aged man would have brought 
her redemption. BB is a lost, pathetic child 
who needs a guide and protector. This 
cliche has proved its worth. It flatters 
masculine vanity; it reassures mature and 
maturing women. One may regard it as 
obsolete; it cannot be accused of boldness. 
But the spectators do not believe in this 
victory of the man and of the social order 
so prudently suggested by the scenario — 
and that is precisely why Vadim's film and 
that of another French director, Autant- 
Lara, do not lapse into triviality. We may 
assume that the ‘little rascal’ will settle 
down, but Juliette will certainly never 
become a model wife and mother. Ignor- 
ance and inexperience can be remedied, 
but BB is not only unsophisticated but 
dangerously sincere. The perversity of a 
‘Baby Doll' can be handled by a psychia- 
trist; there are ways and means of calming 
the resentments of a rebellious girl and 
winning her over to virtue. In The Barefoot 
Contessa , Ava Gardner, despite her licen- 
tiousness, does not attack established values 
— she condemns her own instincts by admit- 
ting that she likes ‘to walk in the mud’. 
BB is neither perverse nor rebellious nor 
immoral, and that is why morality does not 
have a chance with her. Good and evil are 
part of conventions to which she would not 


22 




23 




even think of bowing. 

Nothing casts a sharper light on the 
character she plays than the wedding supper 
in And God Created Woman. Juliette 
immediately goes to bed with her young 
husband. In the middle of the banquet, she 
suddenly turns up in a bathrobe and, with- 
out bothering to smile or even look at the 
bewildered guests, she picks out from under 
their very noses a lobster, a chicken, fruit 
and bottles of wine. Disdainfully and 
tranquilly she goes off with the loaded tray. 
She cares not a rap for other people’s 
opinion. BB does not try to scandalize. 
She has no demands to make; she is no more 
conscious of her rights than she is of her 
duties. She follows her inclinations. She 
eats when she is hungry and makes love 
with the same unceremonious simplicity. 
Desire and pleasure seem to her more con- 
vincing than precepts and conventions. She 
does not criticize others. She does as she 
pleases, and that is what is disturbing. She 
does not ask questions, but she brings 
answers whose frankness may be contagious. 
Moral lapses can be corrected, but how 
could BB be cured of that dazzling virtue 
— genuineness? It is her very substance. 
Neither blows nor fine arguments nor love 
can take it from her. She rejects not only 
hypocrisy and reprimands, but also prudence 
and calculation and premeditation of any 


24 




25 



kind. For her, the future is still one of 
those adult inventions in which she has no 
confidence. ‘I live as if I were going to 
die at any moment,’ says Juliette. And 
Brigitte confides to us, ‘Every time I’m in 
love, I think it’s forever’. To dwell in 
eternity is another way of rejecting time. She 
professes great admiration for James Dean. 
We find in her, in a milder form, certain 
traits that attain, in his case, a tragic inten- 
sit y the fever of living, the passion for 
the absolute, the sense of the imminence 
of death. She, too, embodies — more mo- 
destly than he, but quite clearly — the credo 
that certain young people of our time are 
opposing to safe values, vain hopes and 
irksome constraint. 

That is why a vast and traditional-minded 
rear guard declares that ‘BB springs from 
and expresses the immorality of an age’. 
Decent or unwanted women could feel at 
ease when confronted with classical Circes 
who owed their power to dark secrets. 
These were coquettish and calculating crea- 
tures, depraved and reprobate, possessed 
of an evil force. From the height of their 
virtue, the fiancee, the wife, the great- 
hearted mistress and the despotic mother 
briskly damned these witches. But if Evil 
takes on the colours of innocence, they are 
in a fury. There is nothing of the ‘bad 
woman’ about BB. Frankness and kindness 


26 




27 




can be read on her face. She is more like 
a Pekingese than a cat. She is neither 
depraved nor venal. In Love Is My Profes- 
sion she bunches up her skirt and crudely 
proposes a deal to Gabin. But there is a 
kind of disarming candour in her cynicism. 
She is blooming and healthy, quietly sensual. 
It is impossible to see in her the touch of 
Satan, and for that reason she seems all the 
more diabolical to women who feel humili- 
ated and threatened by her beauty. 

All men are drawn to BB’s seductiveness, 
but that does not mean they are kindly 
disposed towards her. The majority of 
Frenchmen claim that woman loses her sex 
appeal if she gives up her artifices. Accord- 
ing to them, a woman in trousers chills 
desire. Brigitte proves to them the contrary, 
and they are not at all grateful to her, 
because they are unwilling to give up their 
role of lord and master. The vamp was no 
challenge to them in this respect. The 
attraction she exercised was that of a 
passive thing. They rushed knowingly into 
the magic trap; they went to their doom 
the way one throws oneself overboard. 
Freedom and full consciousness remained 
their right and privilege. When Marlene 
displayed her silk-sheathed thighs as she 
sang with her hoarse voice and looked 
about her with sultry eyes, she was staging 
a ceremony, she was casting a spell. BB 


28 




does not cast spells; she is on the go. Her 
flesh does not have the abundance that, in 
others, symbolizes passivity. Her clothes 
are not fetishes and when she strips she 
is not unveiling a mystery. She is showing 
her body, neither more nor less, and that 
body rarely settles into a state of immo- 
bility. She walks, she dances, she moves 
about. Her eroticism is not magical, but 
aggressive. In the game of love, she is as 
much a hunter as she is a prey. The male 
is an object to her, just as she is to him. 
And that is precisely what wounds masculine 
pride. In the Latin countries, where men 
cling to the myth of ‘the woman as object’, 
BB’s naturalness seems to them more 
perverse than any possible sophistication. 
To spurn jewels and cosmetics and high 
heels and girdles is to refuse to transform 
oneself into a remote idol. It is to assert 
that one is man’s fellow and equal, to 
recognize that between the woman and 
him there is mutual desire and pleasure. 
Brigitte is thereby akin to the heroines of 
Fran?oise Sagan, although she says she 
feels no affinity for them — probably because 
they seem to her too thoughtful. 

But the male feels uncomfortable if, 
instead of a doll of flesh and blood, he holds 
in his arms a conscious being who is sizing 
him up. A free woman is the very contrary 
of a light woman. In her role of confused 


30 




3 




female, of homeless little slut, BB seems 
to be available to everyone. And yet, 
paradoxically, she is intimidating. She is 
not defended by rich apparel or social 
prestige, but there is something stubborn 
in her sulky face, in her sturdy body. ‘You 
realize,’ an average Frenchman once said 
to me, ‘that when a man finds a woman 
attractive, he wants to be able to pinch her 
behind.’ A ribald gesture reduces a woman 
to a thing that a man can do with as he 
pleases without worrying about what goes 
on in her mind and heart and body. But 
BB has nothing of the ‘easygoing kid’ about 
her, the quality that would allow a man to 
treat her with this kind of breeziness. 
There is nothing coarse about her. She has 
a kind of spontaneous dignity, something 
of the gravity of childhood. The difference 
between Brigitte’s reception in the United 
States and in France is due partly to the 
fact that the American male does not have 
the Frenchman's taste for broad humour. 
He tends to display a certain respect for 
women. The sexual equality that BB’s 
behaviour affirms wordlessly has been recog- 
nized in America for a long time. Never- 
theless, for a number of reasons that 
have been frequently analysed in America, 
he feels a certain antipathy to the ‘real 
woman’. He regards her as an antagonist, 
a praying mantis, a tyrant. He abandons 


32 





himself eagerly to the charms of the 
‘nymph’ in whom the formidable figure of 
the wife and the ‘Mom’ is not yet apparent. 
In France, many women are accomplices 
of this feeling of superiority in which men 
persist. Their men prefer the servility of 
these adults to the haughty shamelessness 
of BB. 

She disturbs them all the more in that, 
though discouraging their jollity, she never- 
theless does not lend herself to idealistic 
sublimation. Garbo was called ‘The 
Divine’; Bardot, on the other hand, is of 
the earth earthy. Garbo’s visage had a 
kind of emptiness into which anything 
could be projected— nothing can be read in- 
to Bardot’s face. It is what it is. It has the 
forthright presence of reality. It is a 
stumbling-block to lewd fantasies and ether- 
eal dreams alike. Most Frenchmen like 
to indulge in mystic flights as a change from 
ribaldry, and vice-versa. With BB they get 
nowhere. She corners them and forces 
them to be honest with themselves. They 
are obliged to recognize the crudity of their 
desire, the object of which is very precise 
—that body, those thighs, that bottom, 
those breasts. Most people are not bold 
enough to limit sexuality to itself and to 
recognize its power. Anyone who challen- 
ges their hypocrisy is accused of being 
cynical. 


34 




35 


In a society with spiritualistic pretensions, 
BB appears as something deplorably mater- 
ialistic and prosaic. Love has been dis- 
guised in such falsely poetic trappings that 
this prose seems to me healthy and restful. 
I approve Vadim’s trying to bring eroticism 
down to earth. Nevertheless, there is one 
thing for which I blame him, and that is 
for having gone so far as to de-humanize 
it. The ‘human factor’ has lost some of 
its importance in many spheres. Technical 
progress has relegated it to a subordinate 
and at times insignificant position. The 
implements that man uses — his dwelling, 
his clothes, etc — tend towards functional 
rationalization. He himself is regarded by 
politicians, brains-trusters, publicity agents, 
military men and even educators, by the 
entire ‘organization world’, as an object to 
be manipulated. In France, there is a 
literary school that reflects this tendency. 
The ‘young novel’— as it calls itself— is 
bent on creating a universe as devoid as 
possible from human meanings, a universe 
reduced to shiftings of volumes and surfaces, 
of light and shade, to the play of space 
and time; the characters and their relation- 
ships are left in the background or even 
dropped entirely. This quest is of interest 
only to a small number of initiates. It has 
certainly not influenced Vadim, but he, too, 
reduces the world, things and bodies to 

36 




37 


their immediate presence. In real life, and 
usually in good novels and films, individuals 
are not defined only by their sexuality. 
Each has a history, and his or her eroti- 
cism is involved in a certain situation. It 
may even be that the situation creates it. 
In African Queen , neither Humphrey Bogart 
nor Katharine Hepburn, who are presented 
as aged and worn, arouses desire before- 
hand. Yet when Bogart puts his hand on 
Katharine’s shoulder for the first time, his 
gesture unleashes an intense erotic emotion. 
The spectators identify themselves with the 
man, or the woman, and the two characters 
are transfigured by the feeling that each 
inspires in the other. But when the hero 
and heroine are young and handsome, the 
more the audience is involved in their 
history, the more it feels their charm. It 
must therefore take an interest in it. For 
example, in Ingmar Bergman's Sommarlek , 
the idyll which is related is not set in the past 
arbitrarily. As a result of this device, we 
witness the revels of two particular adoles- 
cents. The young woman, who has moved 
us and aroused our interest, evokes her 
youthful happiness. She appears before 
us, at the age of sixteen, already weighed 
down with her entire future. The land- 
scape about her is not a mere setting, but 
a medium of communication between her 
and us. We see it with her eyes. Through 

38 




the lapping of the waters and the clearness 
of the nocturnal sky, we merge with her. 
All her emotions become ours, and emotion 
sweeps away shame. The ‘summer trifling’ 
— caresses, embraces, words — that Bergman 
presents is far more ‘amoral’ than Juliette’s 
adventures in And God Created Woman. 
The two lovers have barely emerged from 
childhood. The idea of marriage or of sin 
does not occur to them. They embrace 
with hesitant eagerness and unchaste nai- 
vete. Their daring and jubilation trium- 
phantly defy what is called virtue. The 
spectator does not dream of being shocked 
because he experiences with them their 
poignant happiness. When I saw And God 
Created Woman, people laughed during 
scenes. They laughed because Vadim does 
not appeal to our complicity. He ‘de-situ- 
ates’ sexuality, and the spectators become 
voyeurs because they are unable to project 
themselves on the screen. This partially 
justifies their uneasiness. The ravishing 
young woman whom they surprise, at the 
beginning of the film, in the act of exposing 
her nakedness to the sun, is no one, an 
anonymous body. As the film goes on, 
she does not succeed in becoming someone. 
Nonchalantly combining convention and 
provocation, Vadim does not deign to 
lure the audience into the trap of a convin- 
cing story. The characters are treated 


40 









r 


42 


si * 



allusively; that of BB is loaded with too 
many intentions for anyone to believe m 
its reality. And the town of St-Tropez is 
merely a setting that has no intimate 
connection with the lives of the mam 
characters. It has no effect on the specta- 
tor. In Sommarlek, the world exists, it 
reflects for the young lovers their confusion, 
their anxious desire, their joy. An innocent 
outing in a boat is as erotically meaningful 
as the passionate night preceding it and 
the one to follow. In Vadim’s film, the 
world is absent. Against a background 
of fake colours he flashes a number of 
‘high spots’ in which all the sensuality 
of the film is concentrated: a strip-tease, 
passionate love-making, a mambo sequence. 
This discontinuity heightens the aggressive 
character of BB's femininity. The audience 
is not carried away once and for all into 
an imaginary universe. It witnesses with- 
out much conviction, an adventure which 
does not excite it and which is broken up 
by ‘numbers’ in which everything is so 
contrived as to keep it on tenterhooks. It 
protects itself by snickering. A critic has 
written that BB’s sexuality was too ‘cerebral 
to move a Latin audience. This amounts 
to making BB responsible for Vadim’s 
style, an analytical and consequently abs- 
tract’ style that, as I have said, puts the 
spectator in the position of a voyeur. The 


44 



45 



consenting voyeur who feeds on ‘blue films 
and ‘peep shows’, seeks gratifications other 
than the visual. The spectator who is a 
voyeur in spite of himself reacts with 
annoyance, for it is no fun to witness a 
hot performance cold-bloodedly. When 
BB dances her famous mambo, no one 
believes in Juliette. It is BB who is exhibi- 
ting herself. She is as alone on the screen 
as the strip-tease artist is alone on the stage. 
She offers herself directly to each spectator. 
But the offer is deceptive, for as the spec- 
tators watch her, they are fully aware that 
this beautiful young woman is famous, 
rich, adulated and completely inaccessible. 

It is not surprising that they take her for a 
slut and that they take revenge on her by 
running her down. 

But reproaches of this kind cannot be 
levelled against Love Is My Profession, the 
film in which BB has displayed the most 
talent. Autant-Lara’s direction, Pierre 

Bost’s and Aurench’s scenario and dialogue 
and Gabin’s performance all combine to 
grip the spectator. In this context, BB 
gives her most convincing performance. 
But her moral reputation is none the better 
for it. The film has aroused furious 

protests; actuaUy it attacks the social order 
much more bitingly than any of her early 
ones. The ‘amoralism’ of Yvette, the 
heroine, is radical. She prostitutes herself 


46 





48 



49 




with indifference, organizes a hold-up and 
has no hesitation about striking an old 
man. She proposes to a great lawyer a deal 
that threatens to dishonour him. She gives 
herself to him without love. Then she falls 
in love with him, deceives him and artlessly 
keeps him informed of her infidelities. 
She confesses to him that she has had 
several abortions. However, although the 
scenario indicates for a moment the possi- 
bility of a conversion, she is not presented 
as being unconscious of the nature of her 
behaviour and capable of being won over 
to Good, as defined by respectable folk. 
Truth is on her side. Never does she fake 
her feelings. She never compromises with 
what seems to her to be obviously true. 
Her genuineness is so contagious that she 
wins over her lover, the old unethical law- 
yer. Yvette awakens whatever sincerity 
and dynamism still remain in him. The 
authors of this film took over the character 
created by Vadim, but they charged it with 
a much more subversive meaning: purity 
is not possible in our corrupt society except 
for those who have rejected it or who 
deliberately cut themselves off from it. 

But this character is now in the process of 
evolving. BB has probably been convinced 
that in France nonconformity is on the way 
out. Vadim is accused of having distorted 
her image — which is certainly not untrue. 


50 



51 


People who know BB speak of her amiable 
disposition, her kindness and her youthful 
freshness. She is neither silly nor scatter- 
brained, and her naturalness is not an act. 
It is nevertheless striking that recent 
articles which pretend to reveal the ‘real 
BB’, ‘BB seen through the keyhole’, ‘the 
truth about BB', mention only her edifying 
traits of character. Brigitte, we are told 
again and again, is just a simple girl. She 
loves animals and adores her mother. She 
is devoted to her friends, she suffers from 
the hostility she arouses, she repents of 
her caprices, she means to mend her ways. 
There are excuses for her lapses: fame and 
fortune came too suddenly, they turned 
her head, but she is coming to her senses. 
In short, we are witnessing a veritable 
rehabilitation, which in recent weeks has 
gone very far. Definitive redemption, for 
a star, comes with marriage and mother- 
hood. 

Brigitte speaks only faintly about getting 
married. On the other hand, she often de- 
clares enthusiastically that she adores the 
country and dreams of taking up farming . 1 
In France, love of cows is regarded as a 
token of high morality. Gabin is sure of 
winning the public’s sympathy when he 
declares that ‘a cow is more substantial 
than glory’. Stars are photographed as 
much as possible in the act of feeding their 

1 Written before Mademoiselle Bardot 
52 became Madame Charrier. 






chickens or digging in their gardens. This 
passion for the soil is appropriate to the 
reasonable bourgeoise that, as we are 
assured, Brigitte is bent on becoming. She 
has always known the price of things and 
has always gone over her cook’s accounts. 
She follows the stock market closely and 
gives her broker well-informed instruc- 
tions. During an official luncheon, she is 
said to have dazzled the director of the 
Bank of France with her knowledge. To 
know how to place one’s money is a 
supreme virtue in the eyes of the French 
bourgeoisie. A particularly imaginative 
journalist has gone so far as to inform his 
readers that Brigitte has such a passion for 
the absolute that she may enter upon the 
paths of mysticism. Wife and mother, 
farmerette, businesswoman, Carmelite nun, 
BB has a choice of any of these exemplary 
futures. But one thing is certain: on the 
screen she is already beginning to convert. 
In her next film, Babette Goes to War , 1 she 
will play a heroine of the Resistance. Her 
charming body will be hidden from us by 
a uniform and sober attire. ‘I want every- 
one under sixteen to be able to come and 
see me’, she has been made to say. The 
film will end with a military parade in which 
Babette acclaims General de Gaulle. 

Is the metamorphosis definitive? If so, 
there will still be a number of people who 

1 Written before this film was released. 



57 



will be sorry. Exactly who? A lot of young 
people belong to the old guard, and there 
are older ones who prefer truth to tradi- 
tion. It would be simple-minded to think 
that there is a conflict of two generations 
regarding BB. The conflict that does exist 
is between those who want mores to be 
fixed once and for all and those who 
demand that they evolve. To say that ‘BB 
embodies the immorality of an age’ ijieans 
that the character she has created challenges 
certain taboos accepted by the preceding 
age, particularly those which denied women 
sexual autonomy. In France, there is still 
a great deal of emphasis, officially, on 
women’s dependence upon men. The 
Americans, who are actually far from 
having achieved sexual equality in all 
spheres, but who grant it theoretically, have 
seen nothing scandalous in the emancipation 
symbolized by BB. But it is, more than 
anything else, her frankness that disturbs 
most of the public and that delights the 
Americans, i want there to be no hypo- 
crisy, no nonsense about love,’ BB once 
said. The debunking of love and eroticism 
is an undertaking that has wider implica- 
tions than one might think. As soon as a 
single myth is touched, all myths are in 
danger. A sincere gaze, however limited 
its range, is a fire that may spread and 
reduce to ashes all the shoddy disguises 

58 



that camouflage reality. Children are for- 
ever asking why, why not. They are told 
to be silent. Brigitte’s eyes, her smile, her 
presence, impel one to ask oneself why, 
why not. Are they going to hush up the 
questions she raised without a word? Will 
she, too, agree to talk lying twaddle? 
Perhaps the hatred she has aroused will 
calm down, but she will no longer represent 
anything for anyone. I hope that she 
will not resign herself to insignificance 
in order to gain popularity. I hope she will 
mature, but not change. 


60 


Brigitte Banlol films 

1952 Le Trou normand (not yet shown in I nglnnil) 
directed by Jean Bojer, with Bourvil, Nadine 
Basil, Jane Marken. (French production) 

Manina, la fille sans voiles (English title, The 
Lighthouse Keeper's Daughter) directed by 
W. Rozier, with Jean Francois Calvet. 

Les dents longues (not yet shown in England) 
directed by Daniel Gelin with Daniel Gelin and 
D. Delorme. (French production) 

1953 Le portrait de son pere (not yet shown in England) 
directed by Andre Berthomieu, with Jean 
Richard, Michele Philippe, Mona Goya, 
Duvalles. (French production) 

Act of love (French title, Un Acte d' Amour ) 
directed by Anatole Litvak, with Kirk Douglas 
and Dany Robin. (Franco-American pro- 
duction) 

1954 Tradita (not yet shown in England) directed by 
Mario Bonnard, with Lucia Bose and Pierre 
Cressoy. (Italian production) 

Si Versailles m'etait conte (English title, Ver- 
sailles) directed by Sacha Guitry, with Sacha 
Guitry and Claudette Colbert. (French pro- 
duction) 

Le fils de Caroline Cherie (not yet shown in 
England) directed by Jean Devaivre, with 
Jean Claude Pascal. (French production) 

1955 Helen of Troy (French title, Helene de Troie) 
directed by Robert Wise, with Rossana Podesta 
and Jacques Sernas. (American production) 

Futures vedettes (English title, Sweet Sixteen) 
directed by Marc Allegret, with Jean Marais. 
(Franco-Italian production) 


61 


Doctor a, Sea (French title, 

directed bv Ralph Thomas, with Dirk Hoga 

and James Robertson Justice. 

^ ,^0^ <Eng» «*. — 

Manoeuvres) directed by ( Franco- 

is ichcle Morgan and Gerard I hilipe. 

Italian production) 

with Raymond Pellegrm. (French production) 

Cette saeree Gamine (English title Mamzelle 
Pigalle) directed by Michel Bo.srond, with Jean 
Bretonniere. (French production) 

(Italian-French production) 

En effeuillant la marguerite <English tide, 
Man/lelle Striptease) directed %Marc Alltfc. - 
with Daniel Gelin. (French production) 

Ft Dieu crea la femme (English title. And God 
a-eSZtan) directed by Roger Vadim, with 
Curt Jurgens. (French production) 

/ a mariee est trap belle (English title. The Brule 
(French production) 

production) 

Interlenghi. (Franco-Italian production) 


r 


62 


Les bijou tiers clu clair tie lime (English title 
Heaven Jell that night) directed by Roger V ...Imii 
with Alida Valli and Stephen Hoyd (I taiun 
Italian production) 

La femme et le pantin (English title. I H oman 
like Satan) directed by Julicn Duvivier. wiili 
Antonio Vilar. Michel Roux and Dario Moreno 
( French-I lalia n prod uct ion ) 

1959 Babel te s'en va-t-en guerre <1 nglislt ml, 
Bahette goes to War) directed by i hriMian 
Jacque, with Jacques (harrier. Ilaiinc. M, . 
semer and ’» ve.s Vincent (I rem h prodm imni 

Voulez vou,\ ihinsei uvi'i iinn ' (I ngb.h ini. 
Come (lame nub me) directed by Mi. h. l 

Boisrond, with Hlcnr\ Vulal Ibm,, y.M 

(French-Kalian production) 

La Verm' (I nglisli title. //„ t, u ,h) | ( , 

Henri-Cicorges ( lonzot, with J.anl'aul It, I 
mondo. (Franco- A rncricuit production) 

1961 La ir m ’ P r ‘vee (English title, I I’l.mie 

■VJair. not yet shown in I ngland) directed by 
Louis Malle with Marcello Muslroianni. pro 
duced by Christine Gou/e-Renal (( ipra 
Progefi production) 


63 




