Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



r. 

(■■■ 
I. 

t ■ 



i-l 

J ■ 
I" 



DEMANDS OF LOVE 
AND REASON. 



RECENT PUBLICATIONS OF 
TOLSTOY'S WORKS, ^ 

In addition to Books xNuifSRATSo on 

COTXR PACKS. 

Resurrection. Tolstoy's Great NovcL 

Complete People's Edition, 6d.s post free, 8d. 

The Relations of the Sexes. A New 

Collection of Tolstoy's Tbonghts on this important 
Question. 80 pages, 41L } post fne, 5d. 

Popular Stories and Legends. First 

Strits t Nev Translations of Four of Tolstojr^ 
most popular Short Stories, (i) Where Lore is 
there God is. (x) Hov much Land does a Man 
need f (3) You can't neglect the Little Fire. (4) 
Iran the Fool. 4d.s post free^ 5d. 

Popular Stories and Legends. Second 

StritSf containing i (5) What Men lire bj. (6) 
The Godson. (7) Two Pilgrims. (8) The Crust 
of Bread. (9) llyas. 4d. j post fnt, Sd. 

//«t«^— Nos. I to 7 also separately, id. each} 
post free, i^ each. 

The Slavery of our Times. Tolstoy's 

most important recent Work on the Social 
Question. Popular Edition, }d. ) post ftcc^ 4d. 

The Meaning of Life: Demands of 

Lore and Reason. The Root of the EriL (Three 
recent Additions to the ** Booklets'* Series.) 3d. 
each J post free, 3^ ; or lod. the Three. 

The Only Means. A New Letter to 

Workers, id.} post free, i^ 

Reason, Faith, and Prayer* Three 

New Letters, id.} post free, i^ 

My Reply to the Synod's Edict of 

EXCOMMUNICATION, id. } post free, I^ 

How shall We Escape? id.} post 

free, i|d. 



Tofcw. tJi 



DEMANDS OF 

*— — - - - -- - — — — ■— — ^-^■^^— ^— .— .^— ~ — . — ■ - --. -— ..^i^^ 

LOVE AND 
REASON . . 



FROM RECENT 
PUBUSHED 

AND .... 
UNPUBUSHED 

WRITINGS OF 

LEO . , 

TOLSTOY 



(xVO RIGHTS RESERVED) 



THE FREE AGE PRESS 

CHRISTCHURCH, HANTS. . . . 

1902 A 2 

Ik 






^'f^- 



DEMANDS OF LOVR 



(An Extract from Leo Tolstoy's Private 

Dia/ry.) 

Translated by Aylmer Maude. 



Yesterday (24th June, 1893), I 
thought: — Let us imagine people of 
the affluent class (for clearness' sake, 
say a man and a woman; it may be 
husband and wife, or brother and sister, 
or father and daughter, or mother and 
son), who have vividly realised the sin 
of a luxurious and idle life lived amidst 
people crushed by work and want. 

They have left the town, have handed 
over to others (or in some way rid them- 
selves of) their superfluities, have left 
themselves stocks and shares yielding, 
say, £15 a year for the two of them (or 
have even left themselves nothing), and 
are earning their living by some craft, 
say by painting on china, or translating 



6 DSMANDS Of LOVE 

good books, and are living in the country, 
in a Russian village. 

Having hired or bought themselves a 
hut, they cultivate their plot of ground 
or garden, look after their bees, and at 
the same time give medical assistance 
(as far as their knowledge allows) to the 
villagers, teach the children, and write 
letters and petitions for their neigh- 
bours, &c., &c. 

One would think no kind of life could 
be better. But, nevertheless, this life 
will be hell, or will become hell, if these 
people are not hypocrites and do not 
lie, i.e., if they are really sincere. 

If these people have renounced the 
advantages and pleasures of life which 
town and money gave them, they have 
done so only because they acknowledge 
all men to be brothers — equals before 
their Father. Not equals in ability, or, 
perhaps, in worth ; but equals in their 
right to life, and to all that life can 
give. 

One may possibly have doubts as to 
the equality of people when one con- 
siders adults each with a different past, 
but doubt becomes impossible when one 
looks at children. Why should this boy 
have watchful care and all the assist- 
ance knowledge can give towards his 
physical and mental development, while 
that other charming child, of equal or 
even greater promise, is destined to 
become rickety, crippled, or dwarfed 
from lack of milk, and to grow up 



AND REASON. 7 

illiterate, wild, hampered by supersti- 
tions, a man representing merely so 
much brute labour-power ? 

Surely if people have left town life 
and have settled, as these have done, in 
the village, it is only because they, not 
in words only, but in very truth, believe 
in the brotherhood of man, and intend, 
if not to realise it, at least to begin the 
realisation of it in their lives. And just 
this attempt to realise it must, if they 
are sincere, inevitably bring them into a 
terrible position. 

With their habits (formed from child- 
hood upwards) of order, comfort, and 
especially of cleanliness, they, on moving 
to the village, after buying or hiring a 
hut, have cleared it of insects, perhaps 
even papered it themselves, and in- 
stalled some remains, not luxurious but 
necessary, of their furniture — say an 
iron bedstead, a cupboard, and a writing- 
table. And so they begin life. At first 
the country folk shun them; expect 
them (like other rich people) to defend 
their advantages by force, and therefore 
do not approach them with requests and 
demands. But presently, bit by bit, the 
disposition of the new comers gets 
known ; they themselves offer gratuitous 
services, and the boldest and most 
insistent of the villagers find out prac- 
tically that these new comers do not 
refuse to give, and that one can get 
something out of them. 

Thereupon, all kinds of demands begin 



5 DEMANDS OF LOVB 

to be made upon them and constantly 
increase. A process commences com- 
parable to the subsidence and running 
down to a level of the grains in a heap. 
They settle down till there is no longer 
any heap rising above the average 
level. 

Besides the begging, natural demands 
for the division of what they have in 
excess of others make themselves heard, 
and apart from these demands, the new 
settlers themselves, being always in close 
touch with the village folk, feel the in- 
evitable necessity of giving from their 
superfluity to those who are in extreme 
poverty. And not only do they feel the 
need of giving away their superfluity till 
they have only as much left as each one 
(say as the average man) ought to have, 
but there being no possible definition of 
this "average" — no way of measuring 
the amount which each one should have 
— there is no possibility of stopping, for 
crying want is always around them, and 
they have a surplus compared with this 
destitution. 

It seems necessary to keep a glass of 
milk; but Matrena has two un weaned 
babes, who can find no milk in their 
mother\j breast, and a two-year-old 
child which is on the verge of starvation. 
They might keep a pillow and a blanket, 
80 as to sleep as usual after a busy day, 
but a sick man is lying on a coat full of 
lice, and is half-frozen at night, being 
covered only with bark-matting. They 



AND HMASON. % 

would have kept tea and food, but had 
to give it to tome old pilgrimi who wt^ra 
exhausted. At leaat it Haemad right t(i 
keep the house clean, but beggar buvi 
come and are allowed to spend tna 
night, and again Hoe breed, after one has 
just got rid of those plokad up during a 
visit to a sick man. 

Where and how can one stop 7 Only 
those will find a point of stopiiaga who 
are either strangers to that faaling of 
the reality of the brotherhood of \n»n 
which has brought thasa people to %\\i 
village, or who are so aocustowad to lia 
that they no longer notice the dlffaranaa 
between truth and falsaliood, Tba fa^t 
is, no such point of stoppage aan axUt ; 
and if such a limit ba fouii/l, it (m\f 
proves that the faaling wbi^h \mfm{fUi\ 
these peopla^s act waa imn^Uui^y fHf 
feigned, 

I eontijuia to ima^m tbmm ymti^Wn 
life. 

Having work^J all tl^y^ iU^y rkU$fU 
home; havijig im» U/o|^ a ^^ //r # 
pillow, they aU^ oa ft^/m^ at^xMr iAmf 
hare tMtsiu^ md Mtu^r a mt^j^ *4 
bread tbey lie ^tmu Up i4^i^, JU k 
antamiL. Bmiu m UMi»i^ mmifid(4 wi*U 
snow. SoflB^yfn? kno€kM imi ti^ 4^^^. 
liMj Ihej nimte Uf oft^mlf A Awa* -wi^M^* 
"^et mad Ufren^ WbM awwutifiUy^vl' 
L«t Inm bar^ ^^ dry utirwmlt tt^ ^ 

m^lofi^Ai^ l^^jtr, <^ 1(^41^ Urn lAm mmm 



lO DJSMAJSVS Uir JjUVJS 

and themselves, since one must sleep, 
share it with him. 

But even this is not all ; a man comes 
who is a drunkard and a debauchee, 
whom they have helped several times, 
and who has always drunk whatever 
they gave him. He comes now, his jaw 
trembling, and asks for six shillings, 
to replace money he has stolen and 
drunk, for which he will be imprisbned 
if he does not replace it. They say they 
have only eight shillings, which they 
want for a payment due to-morrow. 
Then the man says, "Yes, I see, you 
talk, but when it comes to acts you're 
like the rest : you let the man you call 
a ' brother ' perish rather than suffer 
yourselves." 

How is one to act in such cases ? Let 
the fever-stricken man have the damp 
floor and lie in the dry place yourself — 
and you will be further from sleep than 
the other way. If you put him on your 
straw and lie near him — you will get 
lice and typhus. If you give the beggar 
six of your last shillings, you will be left 
without bread to-morrow; but to refuse 
— means, as he has said, to turn 
from that for the sake of which one 
lives. 

If you can stop here, why could you 
not stop sooner? Why need you help 
people? Why give up your property 
and leave the town? Where can one 
draw the line ? If there is a limit to the 
work you are doing, then it all has nc 



AI9I} BBASON. ii 

meaning, or has only the dreadful mean- 
ing of hypocrisy. 

How is one to act? What is one 
to do? Not to draw back means to 
lose one's life, to be eaten by lice, to 
starve, to die, and — apparently — use- 
lessly. To stop is to repudiate that for 
the sake of which one has acted, for 
which one has done whatever good has 
been accomplished. And one cannot 
repudiate it, for it is no invention of 
mine, or of Christ's, that we are brothers 
and must serve each other; it is real 
fact, and when it has once entered you 
can never tear that consciousness out of 
the heart of man. How, then, is one to 
act? Is there no escape? 

Let us imagine that these people, not 
dismayed by the necessity of sacrifice 
which brought them to a position in- 
evitably leading to death, decided that 
this position arose from their having 
come to help the villagers with means 
too seanty for the work, and that the 
result would have been different, and 
they would have done more good, had 
they possessed more money. Let us 
imagine that they find resources, collect 
immense sums of money, and begin to 
help. Within a few weeks the same 
thing will repeat itself. Very soon all 
their means, however great, will have 
flowed into the pits formed by poverty, 
and the position will be the same as 
before. 

But perhaps there is a third way? 



12 DBMANDB OF LOVE 

Some people say there is ; that it con- 
sists in increasing the enlightenment of 
the masses, that this will destroy in- 
equality. 

But this path is too evidently hypo- 
critical; you cannot enlighten a popu- 
lation that is constantly on the verge of 
perishing from want. And, moreover, 
the insincerity of people who preach 
this is evident from the fact that a man 
eager for the realisation of equality 
(even though it be through science) 
could not live a life the whole tenor of 
which supported inequality. 

But there is yet a fourth way: that 
of aiding in the destruction of the causes 
which produce inequality — aiding in the 
destruction of force, which produces it. 

And that line of action must occur to 
all sincere people who try in their lives 
to carry into effect their consciousness of 
the brotherhood of man. 

The people I have pictured to myself 
would say, " If we cannot live here 
among these people in the village; if 
we are placed in the terrible position 
that we must necessarily starve, be 
eaten by lice, and die a slow death, or 
repudiate the sole moral basis of our 
lives — this is because some people store 
up accumulations of wealth while others 
are destitute ; this inequality is based 
on force ; and therefore, since the root 
of the matter is force, we must contend 
against force." 

Only by the destruction of force, and 



AND REASON, 13 

of the slavery which results from force, 
can a service of man become possible 
which will not necessarily lead to the 
sacrifice of life itself. 

But how is force to be destroyed? 
Where is it ? It is in the soldiers, in 
the police, in officials, and in the lock 
which fastens my door. How can I 
strive against it ? Where, and in what ? 

It is here that we find people, revo- 
lutionists, who, whilst maintaining 
their own lives altogether under the 
system of force, strive against this force, 
opposing violence to violence. 

But for a sincere man this is im- 
possible. To fight force by force means 
merely to replace the old violence by a 
new one. To help by "culture," founded 
on force, is to do the same. To collect 
money, obtained by violence, and use it 
to aid people impoverished by force, 
means to heal by violence wounds in- 
flicted by violence. 

Even in the case I have imagined; 
not to admit a sick man to my hut and 
my bed, and to refuse the six shillings 
because I can, by force, retain them, is 
also to make use of compulsion. There- 
fore, in our society the struggle against 
force does not, for him who would live 
in brotherhood, eliminate the necessity 
of yielding up his life, of being eaten by 
lice, and of dying, whilst at the same 
time, always striving against violence, 
preaching non-resistance, exposing vio- 
lence, and above all giving an example 



14 DEMANJba OF LOVE 

of non-resistance and of self-sacri- 
fice. 

Dreadful and difficult as is the posi- 
tion of a man living the Christian life, 
amidst the life of violence, he has no 
path but that of struggle and sacrifice — 
sacrifice without end. 

One must realise the gulf that separ- 
ates the verminous, famished millions 
from the over-fed, over-dressed rich ; 
and to fill up this gulf we need sacrifices, 
and not the hypocrisy with which we 
now try to hide from ourselves the depth 
of the gulf. 

A man may lack the strength to throw 
himself into the gulf — but it cannot be 
escaped by anyone who seeks after life. 
We may be unwilling to go into it, but 
let us be honest about it, and say so, and 
not deceive ourselves with hypocritical 
pretences. 

And, after all, the gulf is not so 
terrible. Or, if it be terrible, yet the 
horrors which await us in a worldly way 
of life are more terrible still. 

There is less danger of death from 
lice, infection, or want after giving away 
one's last crust to help others, than 
there is of being killed at the mancBuvres 
or in war. 

Lice, black bread, and want seem so 
terrible. But the bottom of the pit of 
want is not so deep after all, and we 
are often like the boy who clung by his 
hands, in terror, all night, to the edge of 
the >veil into which he had stumbled 



\ 



AND REASON. 15 

fearing the depth and the water he sup- 
posed to be there, while a foot below 
him was the dry bottom. 

Tet we must not trust to that 
bottom ; we must go forward prepared 
to die. Only that love is true love, 
which knows no limit to sacrifice — even 
unto death. 



{From the Frivaie Diary.) 

A very strange and happy thing has 
happened to me of late. I have begun 
to feel the possibility of the uninterrupted 
happiness of love. I used to be so crushed 
by the wickedness around me, and in 
my own heart, that I could only speak 
and think of love in imagination. But 
now I am beginning to feel its blessed- 
ness. It is as though little flames of 
light and warmth were beginning to 
pierce through a damp wood fire ; and I 
believe, know, and feel, love and good- 
will — and I see now what can hinder 
and bedim them. 

I look upon the ill-feeling I bear 
certain people in quite a new way now, 
and fear it, because I know it hides 
light and warmth from me. And I am 
persuaded that in this feeling of love and 
pity 1 have found the secret of true life, 
which alone gives uninterrupted peace 
and joy. . . 

I think, and not only think, but feel, 
that I can love those who are calle(i 
wicked but who are only in error. I used 



i6 DEMANDS OF LOVE 

to think it impossible to show people their 
mistake and sin without hurting them. 
" Is it possible to pull out a tooth with- 
out giving pain? Yes, cocaine and 
chloroform can allay physical suffering ; 
but there is nothing of the kind for the 
soul.'* Thus I thought, but then im- 
mediately said to myself, " No : there is 
a spiritual chloroform. Here, as in other 
things, the body has been studied 
thoroughly, but the soul has not yet been 
considered. The operation of cutting off 
a leg or an arm is done with chloroform; 
whereas the operation of mending a 
man's soul is done without, and it hurts. 
^That is why it often does not cure, but 
V)nly causes a worse illness — that of ill- 
will. And yet there is a spiritual 
chloroform, and it is well known; it is 
always love." 

^ And that is not all : it is possible to per- 
form a physical operation satisfactorily 
without chloroform, but the soul is ex- 
tremely sensitive, and so every operation 
performed without the anaesthetic of love 
must always be disastrous. The patients 
know this, and that they ought to have the 
chloroform, and they always ask for it; 
and then the doctors are angry. " What 
do they want ? " they say, as I have said 
many times. " They ought to be thank- 
ful to me for curing them, for cutting 
out their sores ; and they say they don't 
want to suffer. They ought to be glad 
of what I do for them — and they want 
more." But the patient won't listen to 



AND REASON. 17 

these arguments; he suffers, and cries 
out, and hides the sore parts, and says, 
" You can*t cure me, and I don't want to 
be cured ; I will go on as before, if you 
can't help me without giving me pain." 

And he is right. What is a spiritual 
illness ? It is error, the loss of the right 
path, the non-fulfilment of the law, the 
entanglement in the net of temptation. 
What then are those to do, who, moved 
by the ties that unite all men, and 
knowing themselves to be in the right 
path, try to help the others and to de- 
liver them from the nets of temptation ? 
A man who has just turned into the 
wrong path can be simply pulled back, 
and it will not hurt him ; but the man 
who is caught fast in the net cannot be 
pulled back — that would hurt him too 
much ; he must first be disentangled very 
gently and softly. And that is just the 
chloroform of love. If you do not do 
this, what is the result ? I see a man 
caught in a net and held fast by his 
neck and hands and feet. I want to 
help, and so I catch hold of him at 
random and begin to pull ; and I strangle 
him, cut his flesh, and entangle him 
worse. The closer a man is caught, the 
more he needs love. 

I understood this a little before, now 
I understand it fully, and am beginning 
to feel it. 

My Father, help me ! 



DEMANDS OF REASON. 



(A short article on Rbason and Beliqion 
written hy Tolstoy by request). 



To those who ask my opinion whether 
it be desirable to endeavour by the aid 
of reason to attain complete consoious- 
ness in one's inner spiritual life, and to ex- 
press the truths thus attained in definite 
language, I would answer in the positive 
affirmative, that every man to a<^eve 
his destiny on earth and to attain true 
welfare — the two are synonymous — must 
continually exert all his mental faculties 
to solve for himself and clearly to ex- 
press the religious foundations on which 
he lives — that is, the meaning of his 
Ufe. 

I have often found among illiterate 
labourers who have to deal with cubic 
measurements, an accepted conviction 
that mathematical calculations are falla- 
cious, and not to be trusted. Whether 
it arises from their ignorance of arith- 
metic, or from the fact that those re- 
sponsible for the calculations have often 
cheated them, with or without intent, 



le 



DEMANDS OF REASON. 19 

the conviction that mathematics is un- 
reliable and worthless for purposes of 
measurement has taken root among illi- 
terate workmen, and become for the 
majority of them an unquestioned fact. 

A similar opinion has obtained among 
men, who, I will boldly say, are bereft 
of true religious feelings, that reason is 
unequal to the solution of religious 
questions, that the application of reason 
to such questions is the most fruitful 
source of error, and that the solution of 
such questions by the aid of reason is 
sinful pride. 

I mention this because the doubt 
expressed in the question, whether it be 
needful to strive for distinct conscious- 
ness in one's religious convictions, may 
be merely the outcome of the belief that 
reason cannot be applied to the solution 
of religious questions. 

Man has been given by Qod one 
single instrument to attain knowledge 
of self, and of one's relation to the uni- 
verse : there is no other — and that one 
is reason. 

Yet he is informed that he may use 
his reason to solve domestic, family, 
commercial, political, scientific, artistic 
questions, but not for the elucidation of 
the problem for which especially it was 
given him ; and, that, for the solution of 
the most important truths, of those 
on acquaintance with which hangs all his 
life, man must on no account employ his 
reason, but must acquiesce in their truth 

b2 



20 DEMANDS OF LOVE 

independently of his reason; whereas 
man cannot be conscious of anything 
independently of reason. It is said, 
Accept the truth by revelation, by faith. 
But a man cannot beheve independently 
of reason. If a man believes this and 
not that, it is only because his reason 
tells him that this is credible, and that 
is not. To affirm that a man must not 
be guided by reason is equivalent to 
telling a man who has lost his way in 
dark catacombs that, in order to find 
his way out, he must extinguish his 
lamp, and be guided, not by light, but 
by something else. 

But it may be objected that not 
everyone is endowed with great intellect 
and a special capacity for expressing his 
thoughts, and that, in consequence, an 
inadequate expression of these thoughts 
may lead to error. 

To this I would reply, in the words of 
the Gospel, that " things hid from the 
wise and prudent have been revealed 
unto babes." And this statement is 
neither an exaggeration nor a paradox 
(as people are accustomed to view those 
pasfa^jes in the Gospels which do not 
piccse them), but is an assertion of the 
simplest and most indubitable truth, 
that unto every being in the universe is 
given a law which he musfe follow, and 
that to enable each to recognisf ^this 
law everyone is endowed with the neces- 
sary organs. Thus every man is endowed 
with reason, and to the reason of 



AND REASON, 21 

every man is disclosed the law which he 
must follow. This law is concealed only 
from those who do not wish to follow 
it, and who, in order to avoid it, 
cast reason aside, and, instead of using 
it to hecome acquainted with truth, 
accept upon trust the assertions of 
those who, like them, have surrendered 
reason. 

Yet the law which men should foUow 
is so plain that it is accessible to every 
child, the more so as no man has to dis- 
cover anew the law of his life. Those 
who have lived before him have dis- 
covered and expressed it, and he has but 
to verify it with his reason, and to accept 
or refuse those propositions which he 
finds expressed in tradition ; that is, not, 
as recommended by those who would 
shirk the law, by verifying reason by 
tradition, but, on the contrary, by verify- 
ing tradition by reason. 

Traditions may proceed from men, and 
be false ; but reason indubitably comes 
from Qod, and cannot be false. Hence 
for the recognition and expression of 
truth no special extraordinary capacity 
is required ; one has but to believe that 
reason is not alone the loftiest sacred 
capacity of man, but, moreover, the sole 
instrument for the understanding of 
truth. 

Particular intellectual qualities are 
needful, not for the acquirement and 
expression of truth, but for the concoc- 
tion and expression of error. Having 



22 DEMANDS OF LOJif 

once deviated from the directions of 
reason, distrusting it, and confidently 
believing what others proclaimed as the 
truth, men accumulate and accept by 
faith — for the most part in the form of 
laws, revelations, dogmas — such intricate, 
unnatural, and contradictory proposi- 
tions, that to express and adapt them to 
life great acuteness of mind and special 
qualities are indeed required. 

Only imagine a man of our world, 
educated on the religious basis of any of 
the Christian confessions — Catholic, 
Greek, orthodox Protestant — who 
wished to elucidate for himself and 
adapt to his life the religious funda- 
mental ideas with which he has been 
inoculated in childhood ! What mental 
labour he must face to be able to recon- 
cile all the contradictions involved in 
the faith he has imbibed from his 
youth ! 

A righteous God has created evil, per- 
secutes men, demands redemption, and 
so forth ; and we, professing the law of 
love and mercy, execute, make war, rob 
the poor, etc. 

To disentangle these impossible con- 
tradictions, or, rather, to conceal them 
from oneself, much mental capacity and 
special talent are indeed necessary ; but, 
to learn the law of one's life, or,^as 
already expressed, to bring one's faith 
into complete consciousness, no special 
mental capacity is required ; one has but 
to refuse to admit anything contrary to 



AND RSAaON, 23 

reason, not to deny reason, religiously 
to guard one's reason, and to rely on it 
alone. 

If the meaning of life is obscure, one 
must not therefore conclude that reason 
is unequal to elucidate that meaning, 
but merely that too much of what is 
unreasonable has been admitted, on 
faith, and that everything uncorrobo- 
rated by reason must be set aside. 

Hence my answer to the question, 
whether one should try to attain com- 
plete consciousness in one's inner 
spiritual life, is, that this is precisely 
the most needful and important business 
of our lives. Most needful and impor- 
tant, because the only reasonable con- 
ception of life is the accomplishment of 
the will of Him who sent us into the 
world — that is, the will of God. And 
His will is revealed to us, not by any 
extraordinary miracle — not by the divine 
finger inscribing it on stone, not by the 
Holy Ghost composing an infallible 
book, not by the infallibility of any 
special holy person or collection of per- 
sons, but by the working of the reason 
of all men, who pass on to each other 
by word and deed the truths which are 
ever becoming more evident to their 
consciousness. 

This knowledge never has been, and 
never will be, complete, but augments 
continually as the life of mankind 
advances. The longer we live, the more 
clearly and fully do we learn the will of 



24 DEMANDS OF LOVE 

God, and, in conseqnenoe, niiat we must 
do to fulfil it. 

Therefore, I think that the elucidation 
and verbal exprennon (which \m an on- 
mbtakeable token of cleamem of idea) 
of all religions tmth accessible to him, 
by every man, however small he may 
think himself or others may consider 
him — ^the least being generally the 
greatest — are of the most sacred and 
most essential duties of man. 



[A letter written to a friend exiled to a town in 
ih/b extreme north of Boasia fcv rerolU' 
Uooarj acttTitief, and who, being there 
gradaallj drawn from rationalittJc riewi of 
religion back into orthodoxy, eodearoiired 
to influence ToUUfj in the tame direction.] 



I HAVE received, and still continue to 
receive, your innumerable letters, dear 
, and I should like to answer cir- 
cumstantially the chief points in them. 

I deem it unnecessary to reply to 
your unjust conjectures, firstly, that I 
am angry with you ; secondly, that I 
believe our life ends here ; thirdly, that 
I might and ought to occupy myself in 
giving pecuniary help to certain in- 
dividuals (chosen by you out of millions 
of similar people who surround me) ; 
for all tuese sti^tements Lave already 



AND BMA80N. 25 

been refuted by me in my writings with 
all the care that is in my power. Ab to 
being angry with you, I cannot be, be- 
cause I lore you. And, for the same 
reason, I should very much like to help 
you in your present depressing and dan- 
gerous position. I refer to your desire 
to hypnotise yourself into the faith of 
the Church. This is very dangerous, 
because by such hypnotism a man loses 
that most valuable human possession— 
his reason. 

To begin from the beginning. I 
commenced this letter before receiving 
yours, but your letter has called forth 
in me a still greater desire and sense of 
my duty to try to help you — and, I will 
frankly confess, not you alone, but 
many others also who find themselves 
in, or are falling into, a similar position. 
I am speaking of sincere and guileless 
men who adopt these or other con- 
victions, not for the purpose of justi- 
fying their privileged position, but 
solely because they see in them the 
truth. 

A wealthy and grand lady of the 
Court once said to me, speaking of 
faith, that she believed " as a peasant 
woman believes," and evidently thought 
she had said something very clever and 
rery deep— so distinguished a per- 
sonage, and yet condescending to be- 
lieve " as a peasant woman belioves." 
In point of fact, what she said was not 
only foolish, but utterly untrue. 



26 DEMANDS OF LOVIS 

This lady can read several languages, 
has studied cosmography and history, 
knows o! the existence of Voltaire, 
Benan, Brahmanism, Buddhism, Con- 
fucianism, and, therefore, she cannot 
believe " as a peasant woman believes." 
The peasant woman, in her belief in 
Our Mother, the heavenly Queen, 
Nicolas the righteous, our Father, the 
heavenly King who lives in the skies, 
etc. — believes in the highest conception 
to which her consciousness has attained, 
and this belief not only presents no con- 
tradiction to her understanding of life, 
but illuminates and elucidates its facts 
for her. Whereas for the lady this is 
impossible. She knows that the world 
was not created six thousand years ago; 
that mankind originated not from 
Adam and Eve, but from the develop- 
ment of the animal ; she knows that 
besides Christians of her denomination 
there are people of other faiths five 
times as numerous ; she knows that the 
Christian teaching has been, and is, 
perverted, and has given birth to hun- 
dreds, thousands, of antagonistic sects, 
and has degenerated into the inquisi- 
tion and wild fanaticism ; she knows 
how the councils were formed, at which 
the dogmas were instituted, knows that 
the same thing took place in Buddh- 
ism, with King Asoka, and in other 
religions ; she knows that religions are 
subject to the same law of development 
as organisms and states — ^that they 



AND REASON. 27 

originate, develop, attain their highest 
point, and then grow old and disappear, 
as the Egyptian and Persian religions 
have done ; she knows that our so-called 
sacred scriptures did not descend from 
Heaven, but were written bj men and 
have been sub-edited and distorted, and 
cannot, therefore, have an absolute 
authority; she knows that, as there is 
no solid sky, Enoch and Elijah and 
Christ could have had no possible 
destination when they flew away from 
the earth in the body, and that if they 
did fly up they must still be flying on ; 
she knows that all the miracles by 
which men seek to prove the truth of 
the ecclesiastical faith are found in all 
the different religions (birth from a 
virgin, signs at the nativity, prophecies, 
wisdom during infancy, cures, resurrec- 
tion, etc.), that all the invented miracles 
repeat themselves in all religions, just 
as the miraculous feats of heroes are 
repeated in the folk-lore of different 
races. All this the lady must know, 
because she has been taught it all, or 
has read it in books accessible to her, 
and because all this is known to the 
gentlemen who frequent her drawing 
^oom. 

Therefore, it is not that she has no 
right to believe as a peasant woman 
believes, but that she cannot so believe. 
She may say she believes thus, but she 
does not in reality. In order to believe 
she must have a faith that, like the 



28 DEMANDS OF LOVE 

peasant woman's, is the highest con- 
ception to which her consciousness has 
attained ; a faith that will not con- 
tradict her understanding of the facts of 
life, but will illuminate, elucidate, bring 
into harmony all her knowledge. 

The lady will not understand me, 
because she requires the peasant 
woman's faibh to enable to live as she is 
living ; that is, in an ungodly way, daily 
consuming upon her whims and luxuries 
the labour of hundreds of working men, 
and at tho same time talking of God and 
Christ, and of her piety. Only by 
assimilating and professing the faith of 
the peasant woman — ^in other words, the 
faith of people who lived two thousand 
years ago — is such an ungodly life, with 
its self-satisfied piety, possible for her. 

Therefore, so far as the lady is con- 
cerned, I can understand. But for you, 
who are exiled to the end of the earth, 
and are being taken a prisoner from 
place to place because you wish to 
realize in your life the Christian truths 
— ^for you, why is this dreadful deceptiot^ 
necessary, this insoluble contradiction 
between your beliefs and your know- 
ledge and understanding of the facts of 
Ufe? 

Why, only think of what you profess, 
and of the position in which you stand. 
I can understand that it is very good 
and pleasant to feel oneself in union 
with those around one, and that when, 
in Lent, church bells are tolling for 



AND REASON. 219 

prayers, and the fasting congregation is 
passing, asking pardon of each other for 
their sins, and praying picturesquely in 
ornate churches — recalling the peaceful 
solemn life of olden times, it is very 
pleasant to join in with them, and to 
share a little of their life. But then 
this is a self-deception ; it is only play- 
ing a part. The essential point in your 
position is, not that you find yourself 
now during Lent, in the town of Pondoj* 
but that you are living in God*s universe, 
on the planet Earth, peopled by 1,500 
millions of inhabitants, of various races, 
professing various religions, in some 
hundred - thousandth year after the 
appearance of the first man; in one of 
the corners of the northern hemisphere, 
among a people called Russians; and 
that you are living in this place and at 
this time by the will of God — that same 
One by whose will exists, not only the 
planet Earth, with its inhabitants, but 
all the apparently infinite universe. This 
position of youri you know, and it is 
in accordance with this you must 
establish your relations to God — that 
is, a relation which would suit equally 
well any man who is in a similar position ; 
a relation that shall be clear, compre- 
hensible, and obligatory to every think- 
ing man — to Japanese, Malay, Zulu. 



♦ Pondoj, a town in the extreme north of 
Russia, to which the person here addressed 
was at the time exiled. — Trans, 



30 DBMAlTDa OF LOJJS 

And you, with your knowledge, what 
relation to God have you established ? 
You say God revealed Himself and His 
truth 5,000 years ago to one small Asiatic 
nation alone, and then not completely ; 
but 1,900 years ago He revealed it per- 
fectly by sending into this same little 
nation His Son, also God. And, owing 
to the circumstance that this Son of 
God was killed by men, the sin of the 
first man and of all who have succeeded 
him was redeemed. But God also insti- 
tuted, through this Son of His, the 
Church, which safeguards all truth, and 
belps the salvation of men by sacra- 
ments — anomting the body with oil, 
swallowing bread and wine, etc. And 
this church exists only in Fondoj, or in 
Russia. Whereas all those who lived 
before the institution of this church, or 
are living outside it, have no hope of 
salvation ! 

Only say this and all the rest about 
baptism, ikons, prayers for the dead, 
and above all, about God punishing and 
redeeming, to any fresh, rational indivi- 
dual who has never heard about it before 
— why, he would stare at you, and either 
run away lest you might in a fit take to 
striking him, or else lock you up as a 
dangerous lunatic. 

V, Tt is only because this poison has been 
instilled into us from infancy that we 
submit to it, as if we did not see it, 
and what is most dreadful of all, this 
awful, gradually instilled poison has 



AND REASON. 31 

rendered useless and ineffectual the faith 
given U8 by Christ, which satisfies the 
highest demands of our time. 

We live 1900 years after Christ, yet 
his teaching in its purity satisfies all 
demands for the establishment of our 
relation to God — not to the CJod of 
Israel, or of the Greek Orthodox, or the 
Roman Catholic, or the Protestant 
Church, but to the God by whose will 
exists this infinite Universe, and in its 
midst the planet Earth, and on the 
earth — I, living, after hundreds of thou- 
sands of years of development of animal 
life, in Pondoj, or New York, or in the 
wilds of Africa. 

The chief difference between that 
sectarian, exclusive relation which 
Churchmen, Buddhists, Brahmans, Mo- 
hammedans, and others call their faith, 
and the true Christian faith, is that all 
these others — to say nothing of their 
want of conformity with knowledge and 
common sense — have the peculiarity of 
mutual exclusion and repudiation ; 
whereas Christ's faith is such that it is 
not only comprehensible and accessible 
to every one, but it is impossible to 
repudiate it, to disagree with it. - Not 
only is it not exclusive, but, on the con- 
trary, it converges towards and unites 
with all that is true and lofty in all 
other faiths. 

Christ teaches us that the Source of all 
is spiritual, rational, and loving. This 
Source is called God, and Father. It is 



33 DEMANLa OF LOVE 

called Father because man is conscious 
of it in himself. 

On entering upon life it seems to 
man that his life consists in his animal 
being, that it is his animal being that is 
his ego ; but, as his reason develops, he 
sees that this animal being is not free, 
but suffers and perishes, whereas in his 
consciousness he feels that there is 
something which is liable neither to 
restriction, nor to suffering, nor to 
destruction; and man experiences a 
contradiction within himself, and falls 
into despair. 

It is this inner contradiction that 
Christ's teachiog answers, even while 
developing it. His teaching says to 
man : " It appears to thee that thou 
livest in the animal being; but this 
only appears so, as it appears that the 
banks are receding when one is advancing 
in a boat, or that the sun moves. In 
man there lives only that spiritual, 
rational, righteous element, the Son of 
God. Man must transfer his ego from 
his animal being into his spiritual, and 
must satisfy the demands, not of his 
animal, but of his spiritual being. And 
it is sufficient for man to comprehend 
this for the contradiction of his life to 
disappear; all restriction, all suffering 
is annihilated, and he becomes perfectly 
free. Death is annihilated, because 
that which is spiritual, that which is 
God Himself, cannot be destroyed ; it 
always has been, is, and will be." 



ANB'BEASON, 33 

In this transference of one's ego from 
the animal to the spiritual being lies the 
^essence of Christ's teaching. The details 
of this teaching (begun by Christ and 
further developed by the true progress 
ol mankind) consist in the unveiling and 
abolition of those snares by which men 
of the animal life seek, through the 
inertia of tradition, to conceal from man 
his ruin in the animal life, and to main- 
tain him in this false way. The unveil- 
ing of these snares is the lifework of 
man — is that which God requires of 
him. 

Such, in its most essential outline, is 
Christ's teaching — that teaching which 
establishes man's relation to the uni- 
verse. And this teaching is not an 
exclusive, but a universal one, the most 
lofty, and accessible to all ; and not 
only does it not contradict other teach- 
ings and modern knowledge, but it 
illuminates and elucidates them. 

And now, in place of this, are we to 
return to an understanding of life of 
5,000 years ago, that gives us sacrifices, 
redemptions, sacraments, and a vengeful 
punishing and rewarding God? God 
preserve us from this, dear friend ! 

What you and many others are doing 
seems to me something like a man who, 
riding on a motor car, and not knowing 
the road, or simply tired of moving fast, 
wishes to diminish the pace, and so 
begins to stick branches in the wheel?, 
lie has stuck in one branch ; the wheel 





34 DEMANDS OF LOVE 

has caught it ; but the motor still ad- 
vances, only slightly checked. He now 
inserts the thin end of another branch, 
and the pace is lessened ; — but soon the 
branch will be drawn in up to the thick 
end, and then the mechanism will be 
wrecked and ruined. 

One cannot with impunity admit into 
one's faith anything that is irrational, 
anything not justified by reason. Reason 
is given us for our guidance, and we can- 
not stifle it with impunity. And the 
ruin of reason is the most terrible ruin 
of all. 

Well, I have said something of what 
I have been thinking — said it in love. 
Please do not answer me point by point, 
arguing about this or that. But \i you 
do not agree, explain to me how you 
reconcile your faith with your under- 
standing of life, and express briefly and 
clearly your conception. 

» ♦ « « ♦ 

The power with which we are con- 
vinced of anything is full, complete, un- 
shakeable, not when our arguments are 
logically irrefutable, nor when our feel- 
ings correspond with the demands of 
reason, but when man becomes con- 
vinced through experience, having tested 
the opposite, that there is only one way. 

Such a power of conviction we are 
given as to there being only one life : 
the following of the will of God. 



AND REASON, 35 

(Fr^m a private letter on Miracles and 
the Miractdotis,) 

Yesterday I began to write to you as 
to why it seems to me that people 
who believe in the reality of the material 
world also believe in the miraculous, 
or, rather, why people who believe in the 
spiritual life, in their spiritual essence, 
and in a spirit God, cannot believe in 
the miraculous, and I did not finish. 
This is what I thought when I was 
writing to you : — 

I believe, or rather I unquestionably 
know that all the material world is 
the product of my five senses, and that 
all the laws of the material world are 
the laws of the mutual relation among my 
senses. All science and all our know- 
ledge are the deductions from various 
relations among our senses; for instance, 
ice, which is hard to my sense of touch, 
becomes soft, liquid, at a certain 
temperature, which I also sense, and 
at a yet higher temperature becomes 
intangible vapour. All our knowledge 
consists of similar investigations of the 
mutual relations of our senses. We 
have studied these relations and know 
them : we know that every impression 
upon one of our senses must be accom- 
panied by certain phenomena for the 
other senses. If we hear a knock — 
this signifies something hard to the 
sense of touch, and so on. 

What, then, signifies a miracle 

o2 



36 DEMANDS OF LOVE 

accoraing to this understanding of the 
outer world? Only that the relation 
among the senses which we have studied 
and accepted as permanent, suddenly 
changes. Such a relation may change 
merely because I have incorrectly 
defined the relation among the senses, 
and I must, therefore, search afresh 
for a correct, permanent relation of the 
senses; or because some one of my 
senses has become perverted (hallucina- 
tion). But no miracle can exist accord- 
ing to such understanding of the world. 
So that if a man of this understanding 
were to witness a miracle it would only 
prove to him that he was unwell, that 
his senses were acting irregularly, and 
that he must treat himself. 

Whereas in the spiritual region there 
can be no miracle for such a man, 
because spiritual life does not submit to 
any such laws, and we know nothing 
about it except that it is, was, and 
always will be, because for it there is no 
time nor space. 

To say that Christ rose in the body 
impHes that the senses of those people 
for whom he rose in the body acted 
irregularly, and oontrarily to those 
relaticms o^ the senses which always 
recur an^ ''are accepted by all, and 
therefore one can only pity the diseased 
state of these men. 

But to say that Christ lives spiritually 
in man, and that we live in others and 
others in us, is to eaqyress the ordinary, 



AND REASON. yj 

nnqueetionable truth comprehensible to 
every man who lives in the spirit. 

This is what I wanted to add. 

That which we have indubitably ascer- 
tained concerning the super-sensuous is, 
that in addition to what we have come 
to know with our five senses — in addi- 
tion to having learnt the limits of our 
being through contact with other beings 
who surround us, we are inevitably 
brought to the acknowledgement of the 
existence of something uncognisable 
through the senses, but undoubtedly 
existent ; this is true to such an extent 
that without the recognition of this exis- 
tence we cannot explain to ourselves the 
existence of anything (for instance, the 
Ether, the calculable vibrations of which 
give us the idea of light, warmth, elec- 
tricity). There is, therefore, something 
besides that which our senses give us, 
but the existence of which we acknow- 
ledge, not because it has been shown to 
us by any of our senses breaking those 
laws concerning them which we have 
deduced and accepted, but on the con- 
trary by our being brought to a reoog 
nition of the existence of this by reason; 
and this recognition not only does not 
violate the laws of relationship which we 
have discovered, but, on the contrary, 
institutes a yet more reasonable connec- 
tion between these relations. 



88 DEMANDS OT LOVM 

REASON AND LOVB. 
(From the Private Diary), 

In order to fulfil the will of God one 
must do His work. To do His work two 
things are necessary --not separately but 
together : Reason and Love are neces- 
sary, Truth and Righteousness are ne- 
cessary. It is necessary that Reason 
should be loving, that is, that its ob- 
ject should be Love; — and that Love 
should be reasonable, that is, that 
it should not be in contradiction with 
Reason. 

An example of an incongruity in the 
former case is the scientific activity of 
Reason: the investigation of the Milky 
Way, of metaphysical niceties, natural 
sciences. Art for Art's sake. An 
example of the latter is exclusive love 
— of one woman, one's children, one's 
nation — a love which has as its object 
not spiritual but animal welfare. 

The fruit of the activity of Reason is 
Truth. The fruit of the activity of Love 
is Righteousness. But in order that 
there should be fruit it is necessary that 
both activities coincide. 

Righteousness will be produced only 
by reasonable love, verified by truth ; and 
Truth — only by loving reason having as 
its aim Righteousness. 

All this I have not invented, but have 
seen, 

♦ « « ♦ « 



AJSV UMAtiUJ^. 39 

♦ ♦ ♦ * » 

Mill says : " Humanity will gain a 
greater share of happiness when every 
man pursues his own happiness, — only 
observing the rules and conditions 
necessary for the welfare of the rest, — 
than when he makes his sole aim the 
welfare of all the rest." 

This is true ; but only if by the wel- 
fare of the individual we understand his 
spiritual welfare, i.e., his conformity to 
the will of God, or, more simply, the 
satisfaction of the demands of his 
conscience (reason and love). 

Let every man seek the kingdom of 
God and His truth, let him place his 
life in this, and the greatest welfare of 
all will be obtained. But then it will 
turn out that man's happiness consists 
In obeying those rules and conditions 
which contribute to the attainment of 
the welfare of all men — ».«., the very 
thing will occur which MiU repudiates. 



^rM 



THE CA USE AND 
OJ CURE OF SOCIAL 



ILLS. 



Sd 



READ 



• 4 



^i 



Cbe Slaoerp 



Our Cimes. 



tt 



\ 






Tolstoy's scathing indictment of modern political economy. ' 

POPULAR EDITION JUSTRBADV 



POST FREB, Cd. 

" It ought to be in the hands of erery thinking muiand woman 
te the country." — Blackburn Times, 



■iiiiiii 




STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES 

CECIL H. GREEN LIBRARY 

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004 

(415) 723-1493 

All books may be recalled afrer 7 days 

DATE DUE 




