Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often diflicult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parlies, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the plus We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a b<x>k is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means il can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's hooks while helping authors ami publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull text of this book on I lie web 
at |http : //books . qooqle . com/| 



// •' 



FREE THOUGHT 
& OFFICIAL PROPAGANDA 



Free Thought 

and Official Propaganda 

h 

BERTRAND RUSSELL 



B. W. HUEBSCH, Inc. 



COPYRIGHT, 1922. BY 
B. W. HUBBSCH, INC. 

PRINTED IN U. S. A. 



' I *-3-y.«. 

This is the Conway Memorial Lecture, 
delivered by Mr. Russell at South Place 
Institute, London, 24 March, 1922. 



Moncure Conway, in whose honour 
we are assembled to-day, devoted his 
life to two great objects: freedom of 
thought and freedom of the indi- 
vidual. In regard to both these ob- 
jects, something has been gained since 
his time, but something also has been 
lost. New dangers, somewhat dif- 
ferent in form from those of past 
ages, threaten both kinds of freedom, 
and unless a vigorous and vigilant 
public opinion can be aroused in de- 
fence of them, there will be much 
less of both a hundred years hence 
than there is now. My purpose in 
this address is to emphasize the new 

Co 



dangers and to consider how they 
can be met. 

Let us begin by trying to be clear 
as to what we mean by "free 
thought." This expression has two 
senses. In its narrower sense it 
means thought which does not accept 
the dogmas of traditional religion. 
In this sense a man is a "free thinker" 
if he is not a Christian or a Mus- 
sulman or a Buddhist or a Shintoist 
or a member of any of the other 
bodies of men who accept some in- 
herited orthodoxy. In Christian 
countries a man is called a "free 
thinker" if he does not decidedly be- 
lieve in God, though this would not 
suffice to make a man a "free thinker" 
in a Buddhist country. 

I do not wish to minimize the im- 



portance of free thought in this 
sense. I am myself a dissenter from 
all known ^eligi dlTS, and 1 nop e thai 
ev ery kind of re tiflinija hpl!^f will^ 
[ fiTout. I do not believe that, on the 
Balance, religious belief has been a 
force for good. Although I am pre- 
pared to admit that in certain times 
and places it has had some good 
effects, I regard ii as belonging to the 
infancy of human reason, and to a 
stage of development which we are 
now outgrowing. 

But there is also a wider sense of 
"free thought," which I regard as of 
still greater importance. Indeed, the 
harm done by traditional religions 
seems chiefly traceable to the fact that 
they have prevented free thought in 
this wider sense. The wider sense is 

[3] 



? 



not so easy to define as the narrower, 
and it will be well to spend some little 
time in trying to arrive at its es- 
sence 

hen we speak of anything as 
free," our meaning is not definite 
unless we can say what it is free 

m. Whatever or whoever is 
"free" is not subject to some external 
compulsion, and to be precise we 
ought to say what this kind of com- 
pulsion is. Thus thought is "free" 
when it is Jree from certain kinds of 
outward control which are often 
present. Some of these kinds of con- 
trol which must be absent if thought 
is to be "free" are obvious, but others 
are more subtle and elusive. 

To begin with the most obvious, 
thought is not "free" when legal 
penalties are incurred by the hold- 

[4] 



ing or not holding of certain opinions, 
or by giving expression to one's be- 
lief or lack of belief on certain mat- 
ters. Very few countries in the 
world have as yet even this elemen- 
tary kind of freedom. In England, 
under the Blasphemy Laws, it is il- 
legal to express disbelief in the Chris- 
tian religion, though in practise the 
law is not set in motion against the 
well-to-do. It is also illegal to teach 
what Christ taught on the subject of 
non-resistance.^Therefore, whoever 
wishes to avoid becoming a criminal 
must profess to agree with Christ's 
teaching, but must avoid saying what 
that teaching was^In America no 
one can enter the country without first 
solemnly declaring that he disbelieves 
in anarchism and polygamy ; and, once 
inside, he must also disbelieve in com- 

[5] 



munism. In Japan it is illegal to < 
press disbelief in the divinity of t 
Mikado. It will thus be seen tt 
a voyage round the world is a pel 
ous adventure. A Mohammedan, 
Tolstoyan, a Bolshevik, or a Chr 
tian can not undertake it without 
some point becoming a criminal, 
holding his tongue about what 
considers important truths. This, 
course, applies only to steerage-p; 
sengers; saloon-passengers are 
lowed to believe whatever th 
please, provided they avoid offensi 
obtrusiveness. 

It is clear that the most elementa 
condition, if thought is to be fr< 
is the absence of legal penalties f 
the expression of opinions. I 
great country has yet reached to tl 
level, although most of them thi 

[6] 



they have. The opinions which are 
still persecuted strike the majority 
as so monstrous and immoral that 
the general principle of toleration 
can not be held to apply to them. 
But this is exactly the same view as 
that which made possible the tortures 
of the Inquisition. There was a 
time when Protestantism seemed as 
wicked as Bolshevism seems now. 
Please do not infer from this remark . 
that I am either a Protestant or a ^ 
Bolshevik. 

Legal penalties are, however, in 
the modern world, the least of the 
obstacles to freedom of thought. 
The two great obstacles are econo- 
mic penalties and distortion of evi- 
dence. It is clear that thought is not 
free if the profession of certain 
opinions makes it impossible to earn 

[7] 



i 



a living. It is clear also that thought 
is not free if all the arguments on 
one side of a controversy are per- 
petually presented as attractively as 
possible, while the arguments on the 
other side can only be discovered 
by diligent search. Both these ob- 
stacles exist in every large country 
known to me, except China, which 
is the last refuge of freedom. It is 
these obstacles with which I shall be 
concerned — their present magnitude, 
the likelihood of their increase, and 
the possibility of their diminu- 
tion. 

* We may say that thought is free 
when it is exposed to free competi- 
tion among beliefs — i. e., when all 
beliefs are able to state their case, 
and no legal or pecuniary advantages 
or disadvantages attach to beliefs. 

[8] 



This is an ideal which, for various 
reasons, can never be fully attained. 
But it is possible to approach very 
much nearer to it than we do at 
present. 

Three incidents in my own life will 
serve to show how, in modern Eng- 
land, the scales are weighted in fa- 
vour of Christianity. My reason for 
mentioning them is that many people 
do not at all realize the disadvant- 
ages to which avowed agnosticism 
still exposes people. 

The first incident belongs to a very 
early stage in my life. My father 
was a freethinker, but died when I 
was only three years old. Wishing 
me to be brought up without super- 
stition, he appointed two freethinkers 
as my guardians. The courts, how- 
ever, set aside his will, and had me 

[9] 



f x 






educated in the Christian faith 

am afraid the result was disapp 

A I ing, but that was not the fault oi 

}[ law. If he had directed ths 

■» f 

JM should be educated as a C 

j; j. tadelphian or a Muggletonian 

K ! Seventh - Day Adventist, the cc 

\i\ would not have dreamed of oh 

i,, 1 ing. • A parent has a right to or 

that any imaginable superstition 
be instilled into his children ; 
his death, but has not the rig! 



ifi 



i - 



t 



1 say that they shall be kept 

from superstition if possible. 

♦.* . second incident occurred in the 

^j 1910. I had at that time a d 

\[ to stand for Parliament as a Lib 

;•; and the Whips recommended ir 

1 1 a certain constituency. I addrc 

■to I 

the Liberal Association, who 
pressed themselves favourably, 

[ro] 




my adoption seemed certain. But, 
on being questioned by a small inner 
caucus, I admitted that I was an 
agnostic. They asked whether the 
fact would come out, and I said 
it probably would. They asked 
whether I should be willing to go to 
church occasionally, and I replied 
that I should not. Consequently, 
they selected another candidate, who 
was duly elected, has been in Parlia- 
ment ever since, and is a member of 
the present Government. 

The third incident occurred imme- 
diately afterwards. I was invited by 
Trinity College, Cambridge, to be- 
come a lecturer, but not a Fellow. 
The difference is not pecuniary; it is 
that a Fellow has a voice in the gov- 
ernment of the College, and can not 
be dispossessed during the terms of 



his Fellowship except for grave im- 
morality. The chief reason for not 
offering me a Fellowship was that the 
clerical party did not wish to add to 
the anti-clerical vote. The result 
was that they were able to dismiss me 
in 19 1 6, when they disliked my views 
on the War. 1 If I had been depend- 
ent on my lectureship, I should have 
starved. 

These three incidents illustrate 
different kinds of disadvantages at- 
taching to avowed free-thinking 
even in modern England. Any other 
avowed freethinker could supply sim- 
iliar incidents from his personal ex- 
perience, often of a far more serious 
character. The net result is that 
people who are not well-to-do dare 



1 1 should add that they re-appointed me later, when 
war-passions had begun to cool. 



[IS] 



not be frank about their religious 

beliefs. 

It is not, of course, only or even 
chiefly in regard to religion that 
there is lack of freedom. Belief in 
communism or free love handicaps a 
man much more than agnosticisau. 



Not only is it a disadvantage to hold 
"those views, but it is very much more 
difficult to obtain for the arguments 
in their favour. On the other hand, 
in Russia the advantages and disad- 
vantages are exactly reversed: com- 
fort and power are achieved by pro- 
fessing atheism, communism, and free 
love, and no opportunity exists for 
propaganda against these opinions. 
The result is that in Russia one set 
of fanatics feels absolute certaintv 
about one set of doubtful proposi- 
tions, while in the rest- of the world 

[13] 



1 



another set of fanatics feels equal 
certainty about a diametrically op- 
posite set of equally doubtful prop- 
ositions. From such a situation 
war, bitterness, and persecution in- 
evitably result on both sides. 

William James used to preach the 
"will-to-believe." For my part, I 
should wish to preach the "will-to- 
doubt." None of our beliefs is quite 
true; all have at least a penumbra 
of vagueness and error. The meth- 
ods of increasing the degrees of 
truth in our beliefs are well-known; 
they consist in hearing all sides, try- 
ing to ascertain all the relevant facts, 
controlling our own bias by discus- 
sion with people who have the op- 
posite bias, and cultivating a readi- 
ness to discard any hypothesis which 
has proved inadequate. These meth- 

[14] 



ods are practiced in science, and 
have built up the body of scientific 
knowledge. Every man of science 
whose outlook is truly scientific is 
ready to admit that what passes for 
scientific knowledge at the moment 
is sure to require correction with the 
progress of discovery; nevertheless, 
it is near enough to the truth to serve 
for most practical purposes, though 
not for all. In science, where alone 
something approximating to genuine 
knowledge is to be found, men's at- 
titude is tentative and full of doubt. 
In religion and politics, on the con- 
trary, though there is as yet noth- 
ing approaching scientific knowledge, 
everybody considers it de rigueur to 
have a dogmatic opinion, to be backed 
up by inflicting starvation, prison, and 
war, and to be carefully guarded 

[15] 



from argumentative competition with 
any different opinion. If only men 
could be brought into a tentatively 
agnostic frame of mind about these 
matters, nine-tenths of the evils of 
the modern world would be cured. 
War would become impossible, be- 
cause each side would realize that 
both sides must be in the wrong. 
Persecution would cease. Education 
would aim at expanding the mind, 
not at narrowing it. Men would be 
chosen for jobs on account of fitness 
to do the work, not because they flat- 
tered the irrational dogmas of those 
in power. Thus rational doubt 
alone, if it could be generated, would 
suffice to introduce the millennium. 
We have had in recent years a 
brilliant example of the scientific tem- 
per of mind in the theory of relativity 



and its reception by the world. Ein- 
stein, a German-Swiss- Jew pacifist, 
was appointed to a research profes- 
sorship by the German Government 
in the early days of the war ; his pre- 
dictions were verified by an English 
expedition which observed the eclipse 
of 1 9 19, very soon after the armis- 
tice. His theory upset the whole 
theoretical framework of traditional 
physics; it is almost as damaging to 
orthodox dynamics as Darwin was to 
Genesis. Yet physicists everywhere 
have shown complete readiness to ac- 
cept his theory as soon as it appeared 
that the evidence was in its favour. 
But none of them, least of all Ein- 
stein himself, would claim that he 
has said the last word. He has not 
built a monument of infallible dogma 
to stand for all time. There are dif- 

[17] 



Acuities he can not solve; his doc- 
trines will have to be modified in 
their turn as they have modified New- 
ton's. This critical undogmatic re- 
ceptiveness is the true attitude of 
science. 

What would have happened if 
Einstein had advanced something 
equally new in the sphere of religion 
or politics? English people would 
have found elements of Prussianism 
in his theory ; anti-Semites would have 
regarded it as a Zionist plot ; nation- 
alists in all countries would have 
found it tainted with lily-livered 
pacifism, and proclaimed it a mere 
dodge for escaping military service. 
All the old-fashioned professors 
would have approached Scotland 
Yard to get the importation of his 
writings prohibited. Teachers fav- 

[18] 



ourable to him would have been dis- 
missed. He, meantime, would have 
captured the Government of softie 
backward country, where it would 
have become illegal to teach anything 
except his doctrine, which would have 
grown into a mysterious dogma not 
understood by anybody. Ultimately 
the truth or falsehood of his doc- 
trine would be decided on the battle- 
field, without the collection of any 
fresh evidence for or against it. 
This method is the logical outcome 
of William James's will-to-believe. 
What is^ wanted is not the will-to-be- 
lieve, but the wish to find out, which 
is its exact opposite. 

If it is admitted that a condition 
of rational doubt would be desirable, 
it becomes important to inquire how 
it comes about that there is so much 

[19] 



irrational certainty in the world. A 
great deal of this is due to the in- 
herent irrationality and credulity of 
average human nature. But this 
seed of intellectual original sin is 
nourished and fostered by other 
agencies, among which three play the 
chief part — namely, education, prop- 
aganda, and economic pressure. Let 
us consider these in turn. 

(i) Education. Elementary ed- 
ucation, in all advanced countries, is 
in the hands of the State. Some of 
the things taught are known to be 
false by the officials who prescribe 
them, and many others are known to 
be false, or at any rate very doubt- 
ful, by every unprejudiced person. 
Take, for example, the teaching of 
history. Each nation aims only at 
self-glorification in the school text- 

[20] 



books of history. When a man 
writes his autobiography he is ex- 
pected to show a certain modesty; 
but when a nation writes its autobi- 
ography there is no limit to is boast- 
ing and vainglory. When I was 
young, schoolbooks taught that the 
French were wicked and the Germans 
virtuous; now they teach the opposite. 
In neither case is there the slightest 
regard for truth. German school- 
books, dealing with the battle of 
Waterloo, represent Wellington as 
all but defeated when Bliicher saved 
the situation; English books repre- 
sent Bliicher as having made very 
little difference. The writers of both 
the German and the English books 
know that they are not telling the 
truth. American schoolbooks used 
to be violently anti-British; since the 

[21] 



I 



war they have become equally pro- 
British, without aiming at truth in 
either case (see The Freeman, Feb- 
ruary, 15, 1922, p. 532). Both be- 
fore and since, one of the chief pur- 
poses of education in the United 
States has been to turn the motley 
collection of immigrant children into 
"good Americans." Apparently it 
has not occurred to anyone that a 
"good American," like a "good Ger- 
man" or a "good Japanese," must be, 
pro tan to, a bad human being. A 
"good American" is a man or woman 
imbued with the belief that America 
is the finest country on earth, and 
ought always to be enthusiastically 
supported in any quarrel. It is just 
possible that these propositions are 
true ; if so, a rational man will have 

[22] 



> 



no quarrel with them. But if they 
are true, they ought to be taught 
everywhere, not only in America. 
It is a suspicious circumstance that 
such propositions are never believed 
outside the particular country which 
they glorify. Meanwhile, the whole 
machinery of the State, in all the 
different countries, is turned on to 
making defenceless children believe 
absurd propositions the effect of 
which is to make them willing to 
die in defence of sinister interests un- 
der the impression that they are 
fighting for truth and right. This 
is only one of countless ways in which 
education is designed, not to give true 
knowledge, but to make the people 
pliable to the will of their masters. 
Without an elaborate system of de- 

[23] 



ceit in the elementary schools it would 
be impossible to preserve the camou- 
flage of democracy. 

Before leaving the subject of 
education, I will take another ex- 
ample from America * — not because 
America is any worse than other coun- * 
tries, but because it is the most 
modern, showing the dangers that 
are growing rather than those that 
are diminishing. In the State of New 
York a school can not be estab- 
lished without a license from the 
State, even if it is to be supported 
wholly by private funds. A recent 
law decrees that a license shall not be 
granted to any school "where it shall 
appear that the instruction proposed 
to be given includes the teachings of 

l See The New Republic, February i, 1922, p. 
359 #• 



e doctrine that organized govern- 
mts shall be overthrown by force, 
>lence, or unlawful means." As 
e New Republic points out, there 
no limitation to this or that organ- 
id government. The law there* 
re would have made it illegal, 
ring the war, to teach the doctrine 
at the Kaiser's Government should 
overthrown by force; and, since 
en, the support of Kolchak or 
enikin against the Soviet Govern- 
snt would have been illegal, 
ch consequences, of course, were 
it intended, and result only from 
d draughtsmanship. What was 
tended appears from another 
w passed at the same time, ap- 
ying to teachers in State schools, 
his law provides that certificates 
irmitting persons to teach in such 

[25] 



■> 



schools shall be issued only to those 
who have "shown satisfactorily" that 
they are "loyal" and obedient to the 
Government of this State and of the 
United States," and shall be refused 
to those who have advocated, no mat- 
ter where or when, "a form of gov- 
ernment other than the government 
of this State or of the United States." 
The committee which framed these 
laws, as quoted by the New Republic, 
laid it down that the teacher who 
"does not approve of the present 
social system . . . must surrender his 
office," and that "no person who' is 
not eager to combat the theories of 
social change should be entrusted 
with the task of fitting the young 
and old for the responsibilities of 
citizenship." Thus, according to the 

[26]: 



j 



law of the State of New York, Christ 
and George Washington were too de- 
graded morally to be fit for the educa- 
tion of the young. If Christ were 
to go to New York and say, "Suffer 
the little children to come unto me," 
the President of the New York 
School Board would reply: "Sir, I 
see no evidence that you are eager 
to combat theories of social change. 
Indeed, I have heard it said that 
you advocate what you call the king- 
dom of heaven, whereas this coun- 
try, thank God, is a Republic. It is 
dear that the government of your 
kingdom of heaven would differ 
materially from that of New York 
State, therefore no children will be 
allowed access to you." If he failed 
to make this reply, he would not be 

[27] 



/ 



doing his doty as a functionary en- | c 
trusted with the administration of the 

law. 

The effect of such laws is very seri- 
ous. Let it be granted, for die sake 
of argument, that the government 
and the social system in the State of 
New York are the best that have 
ever existed on this planet; yet even 
then both would presumably be ca- 
pable of improvement. Any person 
who admits this obvious proposition 
is by law incapable of teaching in a 
State school. Thus the law decrees 
that the teachers shall all be either 
hyopcrites or fools. 

The growing danger exemplified by 
the New York law is that resulting 
from the monopoly of power in the 
hands of a single organization, 
whether the State or a trust or fed- 

[28] 



eration of trusts. In the case of 
education, the power is in the hands 
of the State, which can prevent the 
young from hearing of any doctrine 
which it dislikes. I believe there are 
still some people who think that a 
democratic State is scarcely dis- 
tinguishable from the people. This, 
however, is a delusion. The State 
is a collection of officials, different 
for different purposes, drawing com- 
fortable incomes so long as the status 
quo is preserved. The only altera- 
tion they are likely to desire in the 
status quo is an increase of bureau- 
cracy and the power of bureaucrats. 
It is, therefore, natural that they 
should take advantage of such op- 
portunities as war-excitement to ac- 
quire inquisitorial powers over their 
employees, involving the right to in- 

[29] 



t 




flict starvation upon any subordim 
who opposes them. In matters 
the mind, such as education, this st 
of affairs is fatal. It puts an end 
all possibility of progress or freed< 
or intellectual initiative. Yet it 
the natural result of allowing 
whole of elementary education to 1 
under, the sway of a single organi 
tion. 

Religious toleration, , to a . cert 
extent, has been won because peo 
have ceased to consider religion 
important as it was once thought 
be. But in politics and econom 
which have taken the place forme 
occupied by religion, there is a grc 
ing tendency to persecution, which 
not by any means confined to c 
party. The persecution of opin: 
in Russia is more severe than in i 

[30] 



capitalist country. I met in Petro- 
grad an eminent Russian poet, Alex- 
ander Blok, who has since died as 
the result of privations. The Bol- 
sheviks allowed him to teach aesthet- 
ics, but he complained that they in- 
sisted on his teaching the subject 
"from a Marxian point of view." 
He had been at a loss to discover 
how the theory of rhythmics was con- 
nected with Marxism, although, to 
avoid starvation, he had done his best 
to find out. Of course, it has been 
impossible in Russia ever since the 
Bolsheviki came into power to print 
anything critical of the dogmas upon 
which their regime is founded. 

The examples of America and 
Russia illustrate the conclusion to 
which we seem to be driven — namely, 
that so long as men continue to have 

[31] 




\ 



the present fanatical belief in the 
importance of politics, free thought 
on political matters will be impos- 
sible, and there is only too much 
danger that the lack of freedom will 
spread to all other matters, as it has 
done in Russia. Only some degree 
of political scepticism can save us 
from this misfortune. 

It must not be supposed that the 
officials in charge of education desire 
the young to become educated. On 
the contrary, their problem is to im- 
part information without imparting 
intelligence. Education-should have 
two objects: first, to give definite 
knowledge — reading and writing, 
language and mathematics, and so on; 
secondly, to create those mental 
habits which will enable people to 

[32] 



acquire knowledge and form sound 
judgments for themselves. The first 
of these we may call information, the 
second intelligence. The utility of 
information is admitted practically as 
well as theoretically; without a lit- 
erate population a modern State is 
impossible. But the utility of intelli- 
gence is admitted only theoretically, 
not practically; it is not desired that 
ordinary people should think for 
themselves, because it is felt that 
people who think for themselves are 
awkward to manage and cause ad- 
ministrative difficulties. Only the 
guardians, in Plato's language, are 
to think; the rest are to obey, or to 
follow leaders like a herd of sheep. 
This doctrine, often unconsciously, 
has survived the introduction of polit- 

[33] 



^ 



ical democracy, and has radically 
vitiated all national systems of educa — 
tion. 

The country which has succeeded 
best in giving information without in- 
telligence is the latest addition to 
modern civilization, Japan. Ele- 
mentary education in Japan is said to 
be admirable from the point of view 
of instruction. But, in addition to 
instruction, it has another purpose, 
which is to teach worship of the Mi- 
kado — a far stronger creed now than 
before Japan became modernized. 1 
Thus the schools have been used si- 
multaneously to confer knowledge 
and to promote superstition. Since 
we are not tempted to Mikado-wor- 
ship, we see clearly what is absurd in 

lSee "The Invention of a New Religion." Pro- 
fessor Chamberlain, of Tokio. Published by the 
Rationalist Press Association. (Now out of print.) 

[34] 



Japanese teaching. Our own na- 
tional superstitions strike us as natu- 
ral and sensible, so that we do not 
take such a true view of them as we 
do of the superstitions of Nippon. 
But if a travelled Japanese were to 
maintain the thesis that our schools 
teach superstitions just as inimical to 
intelligence as belief in the divinity of 
the Mikado, I suspect that he would 
be able to make out a very good case. 
For the present I am not in search 
of remedies, but am only concerned 
with diagnosis. We are faced with 
the paradoxical fact that education 
has become one of the chief obstacles 
to intelligence and freedom of 
thought. This is due primarily to 
the fact that the State claims a 
monopoly; but that is by no means 
the sole cause. 

[35] 



(2) Propaganda. Our system 
of education turns young people out 
of the schools able to read, but for 
the most part unable to weigh evi- 
dence or to form an. independent 
opinion. They are then assailed, 
throughout the rest of their lives, by 
statements designed to make them 
believe all sorts of absurd proposi- 
tions, such as that Blank's pills cure 
all ills, that Spitzbergen is warm and 
fertile, and that Germans eat corpses. 
The art of propaganda, as practised 
by modern politicians and Govern- 
ments, is derived from the art of ad- 
vertisement. The science of psychol- 
ogy owes a great deal to advertisers. 
In former days most psychologists 
would probably have thought that a 
man could not convince many people 
of the excellence of his own wares by 

[36] 



merely stating emphatically that they 
were excellent. Experience shows, 
however, that they were mistaken in 
this. If I were to stand up once in 
a public place and state that I am the 
most modest man alive, I should be 
laughed at; but if I could raise 
enough money to make the same 
statement on all the busses and on 
hoardings along all the principal rail- 
way lines, people would presently be- 
come convinced that I had an ab- 
normal shrinking from publicity. If 
I were to go to a small shopkeeper 
and say: "Look at your competitor 
over the way, he is getting your busi- 
ness; don't you think it would be a 
good plan to leave your business and 
stand up in the middle of the road 
and try to shoot him before he 
shoots you?" — if I were to say this, 

[37] 




any small shopkeeper would think me 
mad. But when the Government 
says it with emphasis and a brass 
band, the small shopkeepers become 
enthusiastic, and are quite surprised 
when they find afterwards that busi- 
ness has suffered. Propaganda, con- 
ducted by the means which adver- 
tisers have found successful, is now 
one of the recognized methods of 
government in all advanced countries, 
and is especially the method by which 
democratic opinion is created. 

There are two quite different evils 
about propaganda as now practised. 
On the one hand, its appeal is gen- 
erally to irrational causes of belief 
rather than to serious argument; on 
the other hand, it gives an unfair ad- 
vantage to those who can obtain 
most publicity, whether through 

[38J 



wealth or through power. For my 
part, I am inclined to think that too 
much fuss is sometimes made about 
the fact that propaganda appeals to 
emotion rather than reason. The 
line between emotion and reason is 
not so sharp as some people think. 
Moreover, a clever man could frame 
a sufficiently rational argument in fa- 
vour of any position which has any 
chance of being adopted. There are 
always good arguments on both sides 
of any real issue. Definite misstate- 
ments of fact can be legitimately ob- 
jected to but they are by no means 
necessary. The mere words "Pear's 
Soap," which affirm nothing, cause 
people to buy that article. If, where- 
ever these words appear, they were 
replaced by the words "The Labour 
Party," millions of people would be 

[39] 




led to vote for the Labour party, al- 
though the advertisements had 
claimed no merit for it whatever. 
But if both sides in a controversy 
were confined by law to statements 
which a committee of eminent logic- 
ians considered relevant and valid, 
the main evil of propaganda, as at 
present conducted, would remain. 
Suppose, under such a law, two 
parties with an equally good case, 
one of whom had a million pounds 
to spend on propaganda, while the 
other had only a hundred thousand. 
It is obvious that the arguments in 
favour o"f the richer party would be- 
come more widely known than those 
in favour of the poorer party, and 
therefore the richer party would win. 
This situation is, of course, intensified 
when one party is the Government. 

[40] 



In Russia the Government has an al- 
most complete monopoly of propa- 
ganda, but that is not necessary. 
The advantages which it possesses 
over its opponents will generally be 
sufficient to give it the victory, unless 
it has an exceptionally bad case. 

The objection to propaganda is not 
only its appeal to unreason, but still 
more the unfair advantage which it 
gives to the rich and powerful. 
Equality of opportunity among opin- 
ions is essential if there is to be real 
freedom of thought; and equality of 
opportunity among opinions can only 
be secured by elaborate laws directed 
to that end, which there is no reason 
to expect to see enacted. The cure 
is not to be sought primarily in such 
laws, but in better education and a 
more sceptical public opinion. For 

[41] 



the moment, however, I am not con- 
cerned to discuss cures. 

(3) Economic pressure. I have 
already dealt with some aspects o£ 
this obstacle to freedom of thought, 
but I wish now to deal with it 011. 
more general lines, as a danger which, 
is bound to increase unless very def— 
inite steps are taken to counteract it. 
The supreme example of economic 
pressure applied against freedom of 
thought is Soviet Russia, where, un- 
til, the trade-agreement, the Govern- 
ment could and did inflict starvation 
upon people whose opinions it dis- 
liked — for example, Kropotkin. But 
in this respect Russia is only some- 
what ahead of other countries. In 
France, during the Dreyfus affair, 
any teacher would have lost his po- 
sition if he had been in favour of 

[42] 



Dreyfus at the start or against him 
at the end. In America, at the pres- 
ent day, I doubt if a university pro- 
fessor, however eminent, could get 
employment if he were to criticize the 
Standard Oil Company, because all 
college presidents have received or 
hope to receive benefactions from 
Mr. Rockefeller. Throughout Amer- 
ica Socialists are marked men, and 
find it extremely difficult to obtain 
work unless they have great gifts. 
The tendency, which exists wherever 
industrialism is well developed, for 
trusts and monopolies to control all 
industry, leads to a diminution of the 
number of possible employers, so that 
it becomes easier and easier to keep 
secret black books by means of which 
anyone not subservient to the great 
corporations can be starved. The 

[43] 



growth of monopolies is introducing 
in America many of the evils associ- 
ated with state socialism as it has 
existed in Russia. From the stand- 
point of liberty, it makes no difference 
to a man whether his only possible 
employer is the State or a trust. 

In America, which is the most ad- 
vanced country industrially, and to a 
lesser extent in other countries 
which are approximating to the 
American condition, it is necessary 
for the average citizen, if he wishes 
to make a living, to avoid incurring 
the hostility of certain big men. 
And these big men have an outlook — 
religious, moral, and political — with 
which they expect their employees to 
agree, at least outwardly. A man 
who openly dissents from Christian- 
ity, or believes in a relaxation of the 

[44] 



marriage laws, or objects to the 
power of the great corporations, finds 
America a very uncomfortable coun- 
try, unless he happens to be an emin- 
ent writer. Exactly the same kind 
of restraints upon freedom of 
thought are bound to occur in every 
country where economic organization 
has been carried to the point of prac- 
tical monopoly. Therefore the safe- 
guarding of liberty in the world 
which is growing up is far more dif- 
ficult than it was in the nineteenth 
century, when free competition was 
still a reality. Whoever cares about 
the freedom of the mind must face 
this situation fully and frankly, real- 
lizing the inapplicability of methods 
which answered well enough while 
industrialism was in its infancy. 
There are two simple principles 

[45] 



which, if they were adopted, would 
solve almost all social problems. 
The first is that education should 
have for one of its aims to teach 
people only to believe propositions 
when there is some reason to think 
that they are true. The second is 
that jobs should be given, solely for 
fitness to do the. work. 

To take the second point first. 
The habit of considering a man's re- 
ligious, moral, and political opinions 
before appointing him to a post or 
giving him a job is the modern form 
of persecution, and it is likely to 
become quite as efficient as the In- 
quisition ever was. The old liberties 
can be legally retained without being 
of the slightest use. If, in practice, 
certain opinions lead a man to starve, 
it is poor comfort to him to know that 

[46] 



his opinions are not punishable by 
law. There is a certain public feel- 
ing against starving men for not be- 
longing to the Church of England, or 
for holding slightly unorthodox opin- 
ions in politics. But there is hardly 
any feeling against the rejection of 
atheists or Mormons, extreme com- 
munists, or men who advocate free 
love. Such men are thought to be 
wicked, and it is considered only nat- 
ural to refuse to employ them. 
People have hardly yet waked up to 
the fact that this refusal, in a highly 
industrial State, amounts to a very 
rigorous form of persecution. 

If this danger were adequately 
realized, it would be possible to rouse 
public opinion, and to secure that a 
man's beliefs should not be consid- 
ered in appointing him to a post. 

[47] 



The protection of minorities is vitally 
important; and even the most ortho- 
dox of us may find himself in a minor- 
ity some day, so that we all have an 
interest in restraining the tyranny of 
majorities. Nothing except public 
opinion can solve this problem. So- 
cialism would make it somewhat more 
acute, since it would eliminate the 
opportunities that now arise through 
exceptional employers. Every in- 
crease in the size of industrial under- 
takings makes it worse, since it di- 
minishes the number of independent 
employers. The battle must be 
fought exactly as the battle of reli- 
gious toleration was fought. And as 
in that case, so in this, a decay in the 
intensity of belief is likely to prove 
the decisive factor. While men were 
convinced of the absolute truth of 

[48] 



Catholicism or Protestantism, as the 
case might be, they were willing to 
persecute on account of them. 
While men are quite certain of their 
modern creeds, they will persecute on 
their behalf. Some element of doubt 
is essential to the practice, though not 
to the theory, of toleration. And 
this brings me to my other point, 
which concerns the aims of education. 
If there is to be toleration in the 
world, one of the things taught in 
schools must be the habit of weigh- 
ing evidence, and the practice of not 
giving full assent to propositions 
which there is no reason to believe 
true. For example, the art of read- 
ing the newspapers should be taught. 
The schoolmaster should select some 
incident which happened a good many 
years ago, and roused political pas- 

[49] 



sions in its day. He should then read 
to the school-children what was said 
by the newspapers on one side, what 
was said by those on the other, and 
some impartial account of what really 
happened. He should show how, 
from the biased account of either 
side, a practised reader could infer 
what really happened, and he should 
make them understand that every- 
thing in newspapers is more or less 
untrue. The cynical scepticism which 
would result from this teaching would 
make the children in later life im- 
mune from those appeals to idealism 
by which decent people are induced 
to further the schemes of scoundrels. 
History should be taught in the 
same way. Napoleon's campaigns of 
1 8 13 and 18 14, for instance, might 
be studied in the Moniteur, leading 

[50] 



up to the surprise which Parisians 
felt when they saw the Allies arriv- 
ing under the walls of Paris after 
they had (according to the official 
bulletins) been beaten by Napoleon 
in every battle. In the more ad- 
vanced classes, students should be en- 
couraged to count the number of 
times that Lenin has been assassin- 
ated by Trotsky, in order to learn 
contempt for death. Finally, they 
should be given a school-history ap- 
proved by the Government, and asked 
to infer what a French school history 
would say about our wars with 
France. All this would be a far bet- 
ter training in citizenship than the 
trite moral maxims by which some 
people believe that civic duty can be 
inculcated. 

It must, I think, be admitted that 



the evils of the world are due to 
moral defects quite as much as to 
lack of intelligence. But the human 
race has not hitherto discovered any 
method of eradicating moral defects; 
preaching and exhortation only add 
hypocrisy to the previous list of vices. 
Intelligence, on the contrary, is easily 
improved by methods known to every 
competent educator. Therefore, un- 
til some method of teaching virtue 
has been discovered, progress will 
have to be sought by improvement of 
intelligence rather than of morals. 
One, of the chief olytac^s igJntellL 
genc e is credulity , and credulity could 
>e enormously diminished by instruc- 
tions as to the prevalent forms of 
Nnendacity. Credulity is a greater 
evil in the present day than it ever 
was before, because, owing to the 

[52] 



growth of education, it is much easier 
than it used to be to spread misin- 
formation, and, owing to democracy, 
the spread of misinformation is more 
important than in former times to 
the holders of power. Hence the 
increase in the circulation of news- 
papers. 

If I am asked how the world is to 
be induced to adopt these two maxims 
• — namely: (i) that jobs should be 
given to people on account of their 
fitness to perform them; (2) that one 
aim of education should be to cure 
people of the habit of believing prop- 
ositions for which there is no evi- 
dence — I can only say that it must 
be done by generating an enlightened 
public opinion. And an enlight- 
ened public opinion can only be gen- 
erated by the efforts of those who 

[53l 



') 



desire that it should exist. I do not 
believe that the economic changes ad- 
vocated by Socialists will, of them- 
selves, do anything towards curing 
the evils we have been considering. 
I think that, whatever happens ia 
politics, the trend of economic de- 
velopment will make the preserva- 
tion of mental freedom increasingly 
difficult, unless public opinion insists 
that the employer shall control noth- 
ing in the life of the employe except 
his work. Freedom in education 
could easily be secured, if it' were de- 
sired, by limiting the function of the 
State to inspection and payment, and 
confining inspection rigidly to the 
definite instruction. But that, as 
things stand, would leave education 
in the hands of the churches, be- 
cause, unfortunately, they are more 

[54] 



anxious to teach their beliefs than 
freethinkers are to teach their 
doubts. It would, however, give a 
free field, and would make it pos- 
sible for a liberal education to be 
given if it were really desired. 
More than that ought not to be 
asked of the law. 

My plea throughout this address 
has been for the spread of the 
scientific temper, which is an alto- 
gether different thing from the 
knowledge of scientific results. The 
scientific temper is capable of re- 
generating mankind and providing 
an issue for all our troubles. The re- 
sults of science, in the form of mech- 
anism, poison gas, and the yellow 
press, bid fair to lead to the total 
downfall of our civilization. It is a 
curious antithesis, which a Martian 

Issl 




\. 



