Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



As. <tq^ 



y 



r 



mt ©atJoKc ^xit%. 



1 



THE 

PHILOSOPHY OF ART: 

AS ORATIOK OS THE REl.ATiOS HETWEKN THE 

PLASTIC ARTS AND NATURE. 

F. W. J. TON SCHELLIKG. 



CrHtidlHteV from t^r Serin an, 

Br A. JOHNSON. /rf'Pi^ 




hlch wgrkiuf at the core of UUngv, Bpeaks bylbnn and ibape, la if bjsymbole; 
id only in lo far at he scizoa Ihla apiiil, and vitiUy imiUtn it, haa hohimielf 
mMd SDrtbin; of tniUi,"~-Pt«ei S-IO. 



LONDON: 
JOHN CHAPMAN, 121, NEWGATE STREET. 



M.D.CCC.IILV. 



V •■. 



-••»:k- 



A > / I I 51 M 



• ^^ ■ - * 



■ I ■ ■• 



». ..i; 






. * . r 



■ f 



»jI ■ 



/ 



PREFACE. 



In a time like the present, when art has become, so much 
more than formerly, the affair of all, — Yfhea the general 
interest is directed and instructed by a commission of sudi 
accomplished men, — ^the Translator has thought that an £ng- 
hgh. version of a celebrated Essay, by one of the greatest of 
modem philosophers, could not but be welcome; and the 
more so, as the mode in whidi the subject is treated is very 
different from that in which it has heretofore been handled 
by English critics^ 

In England there has been but httle endeavour, since 
the last generation, after a scientific system of Esthetics. 
Perhaps the want of decided success in the authors who 
then treated of taste, though rather to be attributed to the 
hostile influences of the time, has indisposed the public mind 
to the investigation itself. But with better times we may 



lu^p^ forj^v^qce^^y^uvajtiki r^ aiid.<al^nug]i a fieniia- 

n^ gWi 9»»riPrt^iH:hQped.i|».,fir(nn ftcoti^ of/inve^ti- 

g^lji^ ^1^1^ proceeds ^i&:oEI^<^hl»t ,4[>ovit' <if )mvr foam whiob^ 

t^^^«i]^egt( ji|,gi9nsra% 4^nt^mpb|;^, e^ i^^«tady nf that* 

U^ which a different set of iqAi|Uectui4il^btiQii8.JltfU 

le^j ix^j^%^\ie witly)i4 ?we ; «pd iihei f*cPQmp?»(7iiig dgsaaji^ is 

ofijg;^,t9 tb^J^li^gJiah Public^ rather ^. a ^^ 

a8^,pi ^])ftit)qite .£or ipdiyidiial e^^ ia ^culbislvail^Qg that foM^ 

of^n^sfi^rcl^w^u^^iaalrqad :^. . >, . . <,^,\y< 

It is impossible,. ev^ tp ^lanspla^ t^ philosophy of mf) 
country from its natural ground to a fosdgn pn^. j,. The ogniv^ 
ditions of its life aie. so. inextricahly interwp^^^^^^ 
of thought, which cannot he. transplanted w]thit>^ that /sudi . 
an endeavour must be ever fruitless. * ., - ji. 

To this cause is to be attributed, more than to any other, 
the failure which, on the whole, attended Ck^teddge's ^dea- 
vour in this direction* 

pur English philosophy must prpce^ in an^ organic deve- 
lopment from Locke, Hume, and B^kel^,: as^thq. German 
one, did from Leibintz, Kant, and Fidite, to Scdi^lu^g^^apd 
Hegpl. ....,.- ..■-■:■:■■ 

T^<^ pfiar^cteristiq difference bet\)v:een tlus Essajr and «U 
th^t hlf9' appeared ij^ i^ngland pn tbj9 sq)s]ect» is^ t^Mt it pro- 
ceei^ in its investigation fnm. the idc^ of prt itself; whereas 
ouri^ci;^ti(^i9m is rath^ £dun,de4 .up^U; a c^onfosed cpnudera* 
tion of its works. 



tQj4)e ei^plained' tine f<»«^^jibi' '^ d^J^ni^fiiKkt!!:^ ^i^fliSk kM' 
idedi 0r^tdie>cliaiackru^ ld^lbe'%idlt€id'>d^ ' ihd^^!^ piA^^ 

The #r^^btit«^h;k>% -^&ed tif^db<'(tiegk''^(mbXSFti^^ 

before the Royal A<iad^^ <# Sdehtic^;'^^ Mtihibbi-\»ti^%&^^ 
12tii df Oatsi^is^i'imt biimW^tA dT die>'l)IMa^ dt ike 
King of Bavaria, dhd'W iii fi^;"«ir ti^batfeit'^CO' iH'W^ 
Seh^mg's l%fl6S0ipby^f mt^^ te 0^'^ 

a dreatff«^ pitfpbse ih tiisitQre (limi^ i^^ M treats "Ae*^^ 
creative power of genius kl art aii^ it ihtdlectiiat coffflk- ' 

tive;'^- ' •"- -^^ ■ ■■ •- •"•'•-■ " ■ '' 

It may be ai^csed^ ci^yiHiiki setvict can sach abstract tii6d-" 
ries be to art? Has not art brought fordi all its worfder^ ' 
witiiout ^liem, and tMef iidt^vti^o ad well wkhbtttUieiii ^s 
odier thnesf have ddA« ^ ^ ' . i. - ^ * -rinqu* 

It'isc«*«tytrtie^ that the works of genius do not wairfoi*^^ 
an intelligible theory of then- production; indeed, that Jn^- 
du^tion mibst ever jprcjcede the tbeory whidi shaM AccBtrat 
for^attd ^lainit^; Neither fe it pretended MrtfH^bt^'^^ 
can evel^'staftd in the! ptede 6f g^tisr bot^-WhfeA oKc^ flfe^'*^ 
true one is disooivefed, 4t tlffbrcfe "ft t6!*t 'aWd britefibn ctf all^'*' 
works within its sphere. i < . ■ u t^ 



necessary to reasoning ; but» when once discorered/ it^'^betfe 
«i a oorrMhfe 90 indi>ddind ^««)rs;; aUd'oflfbni & ftit better 
Mwidi^lli^lteiibostgittieyar*^^ ^e'^tiethi^iDiy of 
«lt'iitali^ k'^irtscfii^ th6 s^ ^ ^^ > 

Even snpposing that the tme theory is not yet discov^l^, 
still the endeavour after it, when once general^ frees art 
from individual views and likings, and forces men to give 
SMre. cqgcat re^isons Jbr their judgments than a pere asaur- 
fiiice of their apprecittticm lof it^ ^brk^ ' " 

To contribute in any way to so desirable a state of things 
is the ardent wish of the Translator, and his inducement thus 
to appear before the PubUc. 

Fully aware of the many shortcomings in the execution 
of the Work, he would fain say something in extenuation oi 
them. 

There is a peculiar difficulty in translating any philoso- 
phical work from the German. Words which, relatively 
to systems in that country, have a clear and determinate 
meaning, become vague and deficient in force and exactness 
when translated into another language, in which those 
systems are wanting. 

From this cause the Translator feels that those faults may 
be in some measure imputed to the following vergion ; but 
he hopes that a candid consideration of the difficulty, nay, 
almost impossibility, of avoiding them will in some degree 



moderate that vcwnure tp in^iuc)i th^j^wo^dbofth^iiwi^ be 

>rOf OQ^ ;thiJ|gfrlle^£8elft ieei^BilWr*vi0^> that tho^eturhoi can 
best s^rofsfNte./tib^e impcME^aQP^, of ; the Worfi /vji^ i^^isi^ 
lenient i|i,^wr^tffe»to5lrt?»<rf hiffl^who iMUft MtjTodiusfii.tlihem 

to. itw .•.;•.',, ^.,.. t?"Mi. '.: v-ro'^f'" .,.]-.• . .' ■■•'* I, '-■.'• h:>\u< v^-A 

Note. — The English reader, who may wish to become more 
i&tShmtdty acqiniil^ed 'i^^ 4)ie%en^ral -a^)^ of ^Sc^^IB^b mA- 
losophy, is referred to J(4m»to|]^*g ^^i^afitf t^tjofi > of y^reppTna^'s 
Handbuch der Geschichte der Philosophie. 



i 



ON THE RELATION 



BETWEEN THE 



PLASTIC ARTS AND NATURE. 



Festive days like the present, adorned with the name of a 
king, that, like a magic word, calls forth joyful emotions in 
all hearts, seem of themselves, where words only can celebrate 
them, to lead to the contemplation of the universal and most 
worthy ; thus joining the hearers in intellectual sympathy, as 
the patriotic feelings of the day have already in loyalty. 

For what more noble thing can we be indebted to the rulers 
of the earth, than for the preservation for us of the peaceful 
enjo3nnent of the excellent and beautiful; so that we cannot 
call to mind their good deeds, nor contemplate the general 
happmess, without bemg unmediately led up to the universally 
human? 

Such a day could scarcely be distinguished by a more ap- 
propriate delight than by the opening to public view a true 
and great work of plastic art; nor less appropriate seems the 
attempt, suited also to this place, (devoted to the sciences 
alone,) to develop the nature of art itself, and in a manner to 
display the creation of its works before the intellectual eye. 

How much, and for how long a time, has art been felt, 
thought upon, and judged of ! How, then, could the speaker 
hope, in such an assembly of enlightened connoisseurs and 

B 



2 ON THE RELATION BETWEEN 

penetrating judges, to give the subject new charms, did he not 
discard foreign ornament, and rather reckon on a portion of 
their general favour and consideration for the thing itself ? 

Other subjects must be elevated by eloquence, w, if there 
is anything extraordinary in their nature, be made credible by 
exhibition. 

Art has at first this advantage — ^that it appeals to sight; 
and doubts of a perfection above the common measure, that 
might otherwise be heard, are met by the fulfilment; as that 
which in the idea could not be conoeivedy here steps embodied 
before our eyes. 

But, on the other hand, the speaker is 8upp<»rted by the 
consideration that the many theories which have been formed 
on this subject have all far too little fallen back upon the first 
source of art ; for most artists, although they all should imi- 
tate nature, seldom arrive at a conception of the being of 
nature itself. 

Connoisseurs, and thinkers too, mostly find it more conve- 
nient, on account of the greater unapproachableness of nature, 
to educe their theories more firom the contemplation of the soul 
than from a philosophy of nature ; but such theories are gene- 
rally much too jejeune ; they make general remarks of real 
excellence and truth on art, but f(»^ the plastic artist are gene- 
rally inefiective, and in practice totally fruitless. 

Plastic art should, according to the ancient saying, be a 
dumb poetry. The author of this critieism, doubtless, meant 
thereby that art should, like poetry, express intellectual 
thoughts — conceptions whose origin is the sodl ooly ; not by 
speech, but, like silent nature, by shape, by form, by sensuous 
and independent works. Plastic art, then, evidently stands 
as a. connecting link between the soul and nature, and can 
only be conceived as their vital synthesis. 

As plastic art has, indeed, its relation to the soul, in com- 
mon with poetry and all other arts, thait relation in which it 
stands to nature, and by which it should be a like creative 
power, remains as its peculiar character ; and thus only on 



THE PLASTIC ABTS AIJID KATUBE. 3 

tills relation can a thecny groand itself, that can be satisfy* 
ing to the nnderstaading, as well as adyancing and valuable 
to art. 

We hope, th^ bj c(»it«nplating plastic art in its relation 
to its tme antitype and source, to be able to add s(»nething 
not jet acknowledged to its theory; to give a more exact 
determinaticHi and illastration of its conceptions; but chiefly to 
set forl^ the inner conne:don of the entb*e temple of art in 
the light of a higher necessity. 

But has not science always acknowledged this relation ? Is 
not every theory of recent times founded upon the very prin- 
ciple that art should be tiie imitator of nature ? Indeed it has 
been so; but what could this broad and general principle 
profit the artist, among the many meanings of tlie conception, 
nature, and while there are as many views of this concep- 
tion as there are ways of life ? To some, nature is nothing 
more than the dead aggregate of an indeterminate host of 
objects, or the space in which things are packed as in a case ; 
to another, merely the ground whence he draws his nourish- 
ment and sustenance. To the inspired inquirer alone is nature 
the holy and ever-creating primal energy of the world, which 
begets and activdy produces all things from itself. 

That principle would, indeed, have a higher impmi;^ if it 
taught art to imitate this creative ena*gy; but there can be 
little doubt how it was meant to be understood, when one is 
acquainted with the general condition of tiie sciences at the 
time of its appearance. Strange, indeed, would it be, if that 
which denied all life in natm*e ^ould hold that life up for 
knitation to art« Of them, the words of the deep-thinking 
tttan were true: — "Your lying philosophy has annihilated 
nature; wherefore do you demand that we should imitate 
her — that you may have the new pleasure of exerting the 
same tyranny on her disciples ?" • 

Nature was to them, not merely a dumb, but a totally dead 
image, in whose inmost recesses was implanted no living word; 
a hollow seaffolcting of forms, from which an equally hollow 



4 ON THE RELATION BETWEEN 

image was to be transferred to canvaas or marble. This was, 
indeed, the right theory for the more ancient and rough rax^es ; 
as they saw not the godlike in nature, they derived idols from 
her; while for the penetrating Hellenist, who everjrwhere 
recognised the traces of this living creative energy, nature, 
produced gods indeed. 

Should, then, the disciple of nature imitate, without distinc- 
tion, all things in her, and in each thing, all things? Only beau-^ 
tiful objects should be reproduced, and only the beautiful and 
perfect in them. Thus the principle would be more narrowly 
determined; but at the same time it would be maintained that 
in nature the perfect m mixed wit^ the imperfect, the beau- 
tiM with the unlovely. 

How, then, could he who looks upon nature with an eye of 
slavish imitation distinguish the one fr<»n the other ? The 
very characteristic of the imitator is to give rather the faults 
than the excellences of his original, because they ofifer greater 
facility and apparent resemblance ; and thus we see that imi- 
tators of nature in this sense have oftener, and with greater 
partiality, imitated the hateful than the beauti^. 

If we look upon things, regarding not their essence, but 
merely the empty and derived fwm, they answer hot to our 
souls ; we must engraft (m them our own feelings and mind, 
if we would they should respond to us. But what is the per- 
fection of a thing ? Nought else but the creative life in it — 
its power of asserting its own individuality. Never, then, with 
him to whom nature a|^)ears as dead, will that divine, and, 
as it were, chymical process, succeed, from which, as from a 
purifying'" fire, flows the pure gold of beauty. 

The general aspect of this relation to nature was not altered 
when the unsatisfying character of the iwinciple became more 
generally felt ; not even by the noble foundation of new theory 
and knowledge laid by J. Winkelmann. He, indeed, gave the 
soul her whole sphere of action in art, and elevated it from 
an unworthy dependence to a more intellectual freedom. 

Impressed in the most lively manner by the beauty of form 



THE FLASnC ASnA AND NATURE. 5 

in the works of antiquitj^ h» taught tibflt the production of the 
ideal; and a nature more elevated than lAm actnal, with intel* 
lectaal expression, was the highest aim of art. 

We will inquire, howeter, in what sente this sirpasetog 
the actual was by the greater number imderstood; and it is 
evident that with this theory also nature was still looked upon 
as mere product, and things as lifeless presences, and -that 
thereby the idea of a living and creative nature was by no 
means awakened. 

Thus neither could those ideal fdrms be animated by any 
positive conceptions of their being or nature* 

If those of common life were dead for ibe dead beholder, 
these were not less so. If no self-development of the former 
were possible, neither was there of the latter. 

The object of imitation was altered, but imitatioB re* 
mained; the lofty works of antiquity took the place of nature, 
from which the student busied himself to take the outward 
form, but without the spirit that filled it. They, indeed, are 
unapproachable — more so than the works of nature; they 
leave us also colder than nature, unless we bring with us that 
intellectual eye which can penetrate their veil and perceive the 
living energy within them. 

On the other hand, however, artists since this time have 
acquired a certain ideal aim and notions of a more than mate- 
rial beauty ; but these noti<xis were but beautiM words, to 
which no deeds corresponded. If the earlier practice of art 
begat bodies without souls, this theory taught the secret of 
the soul, but not that of the body. The theory, as is usual, 
passed over with hurried steps to the other side. The living 
mid-point was not yet found. 

Who dare say that Winkelmann knew not the highest 
beauty ? but it appears with him in its dissevered elements, 
on the one side as beauty of conc^tion, which flows from the 
soul, and on the other as beauty of form. But what active 
effective link binds the two together, or by what energy are 
the soul and body together created as it were at once, in one 

b2 



6 ON THE ^lATieK BSTWCEN 

\ff€^ ? If this is not in the power <€a]:^ aa it is in that of 
nattire, it can indeed create nothing. > 

This living synthesis Winkelmimn did not point oat; he 
did not teaeh how the form should be begotten of the concep- 
tion; thus art pursfoed that method which we might call the 
retrogressive^ striving from the form to arrive, at the essence. 

But the absdute is not thus arrived at; > bj a mere grada* 
tion of the limited the illimitable will never be reached. Thus 
all works which have taken their commeneeBient from the 
fonoy betray, however elaborate in that direction, an inex- 
tinguishable vacui<y at the very point where. we expect the 
perfect, the essentiai, the ultimate. 

The miracle by which the finite should be elevated to the 
infinite, and by which humanity should be dieified, is wanting* 

The magic circle is drawn, but the spirit which should be 
forced into it appears not, regardless of the voice of one who 
imagines a creation possible by mere form. 

Far be it from us to impute the blame to the spirit of that 
accomplished man, whose immortal theory and revelati<m of 
the beautiftd was rather the occasion than the effective cause 
of this tendency of art. Holy,. as that of an universal bene- 
factor, be to us his memory 1 He stood like a mountain in 
elevated solitude: through his whole time no answering sound, 
no movement of life, no pulse beat in the whole wide kingdom 
of science answering his strivings; when his true companions 
arrived, even then was the excellent one snatched away. 

In intellect and perception he belonged not to his own time, 
but either to antiquity or to that time whose creator he was 
— ^the present. 

He gave by his theory the first foundation to that general 
structure of the knowledge and science of the ancients which 
later times have conmienced to build upon. He first conceived 
the thought to look upon the works of art in the manner and 
after the laws of eternal works of nature ; for before and after 
him, all foreign human action was looked upon and treated as 
the work of arbitrary will. His spirit was among us, like a 



THE WJUmC ABT8 AKI> NATURE. 7 

soft^breathing wind^^widcb deered froin'icfoiidsttbd h^^Mt of 
ancient art for us, so that TVe'ttc^w, with cleior eyes, 'and- Jihi- 
dfered by no mist, behold fts stars. ' How ffinst behatd'felt 
the emptiness of his time! Had we; ind^ed^ no othet* ja^vound 
than his true feeling of Mendsfaip and iilextingnishaHe longmg 
after its enjoyments, we shonld have justification ^enotigh for 
this word in enforcement of an intellectnal love for thi)^ aoeom- 
plished man, of classic life and classic -activity; atid If he felt 
another lodging winch could not be stilled, it was towards a 
more intimafte acquaintance widi nature;' he cfxpresses repeat- 
edly to his intnnate frieiids, in the l^t^yeaiis of hie life; that 
his last observations would gO from art' to ilttture ; "feife' in a 
manner anticipating the deficiency; and that he bad failed to 
perceive in the harmony of the universfe the highest beauty 
which he did in God. 

Nature meets us everywhere ; at first, in forms more or less 
hard and undeveloped; like that serious and quiet beauty, that 
wins not the attention by striking peculiarities — ^which attracts 
not the eye of all. 

How can we, as it were, intellectually melt these apparently 
hard forms, that the pure energy of things may flow together 
with that of our souls, and both gush forth together in one 
stream ? 

We must look beyond form in order to gain an intelli- 
gible, living, and true perception of it. Contemplate the most 
beautiful foims, and what remains when you have denied in 
them the eflfective principle ? Nothing but mere abstract 
qualities, such as extension and the relations of space. Does 
the position of one portion of matter in the neighbourhood of 
another contribute, in any degree whatever, to its inward 
essence, or the contrary; evidently the latter. Proximity 
makes not the form, but the kind of proximity ; this, however, 
can only be determined by a positive force opposed to the 
disjunctivity, and subordinating the plurality of the parts to 
the unity of one conception, from the force which works in the 
crystal even to that which, like a soft magnetic stream, gives 



8 ON THE RELATION BETWEEN 

to the particles of matter in the hoinan fiume such arrftnge* 
m^t and mntaiil interdependence that the conoepti(m oressen- 
tial unity and beauty becomes tCsiI^. 

But that ^^1^ may fiolly comprehend the essential in fdrm^ 
we must regard it, not merely as an active principle in generfd^^ 
but as intellect and effectiye science^ 

All unity can be no other than intellectual in its nature and 
origin; and to what tends all investigation of nattu'e, save to 
tiie discovery of this same science in her? Fo!r that in which 
there is no understanding cannot be the object <^ tmderstand* 
ing. The peroeptionless cannot be perceived. The science 
through which nature acts is, indeed, in no pcnnt like human 
science, which is interwoven with a reflection on itself ; in it 
conception differs not from action, nor intention from fulfil** 
ment. 

Thus rough matter strives, as it were blindly, after regular 
shape, and unconsciously assumes pure stereometric fcmns^ 
which, indeed, belong to the realm of conception, and are 
somewhat of spirituality in matter. The stars are instinct 
with the most exalted science of number and measure, which 
they, without a conception of these things, put into practioe 
in their movements. More evident, though not self-conscious, 
appears the living perception in animals, which we therefore 
see accmnplish innumerable works, far nobler than themselves, 
without deliberation on their part: the bird, enraptured with 
music, excels itself in soul-filHng tones; the small, art-gifted 
creature, without practice or instruction, perfects light works 
of architecture ; but all are led by an overpowering spirit, 
which lightens indeed in solitary flashes of knowledge, but 
nowhere comes forth as the friU sun, as it does in man. 

This effective science is, in nature and art, the bond between 
conception and form, between body and soul. Every single 
thing is jH-eceded by an eternal conception schemed in the 
infinite understanding ; but by what means does this concep- 
tion pass into actuality and embodiment? Only throu^ the 
creative intelligence, which is as necessarily combined witii the 



THE PLASTIC ABTS AXfD NATURE. 9 

infinite understanding, as that essence, which comprehends the 
idea of immaterial beauty, is combined with that which em* 
bodies it in the mind of the artist. 

If that artist is to be accounted happy and heiore aJd iM*ai8e- 
worthy, to whom the gods have granted this creatiye spirit^ so 
will that work of art appear in the same measure excellent^ 
in which this nnaUoyed energy of creation and activity of 
nature is shown us as in an outline. 

It has long been perceived that, in art, all things are not 
performed with a ftill consciousness; that with the conscious 
activity an uncxwscious energy must unite itself; that the 
perfect union and reciprocal interpenetration of the two is that 
which accomplishes the highest in art; works wanting this seal 
-of unconscious power are recognised by the evident want of a 
self-sufficing life, independent of the producing life; while on 
the contrary, where this (grates, art gives to its productions, 
together with the highest clearness of the imderstanding, that 
inscrutable reality by which they resemble works of nature. 

The position of the artist, in relation to nature, should be 
continually made clear by the declaration that art, really to be 
art, should at first withdraw itself from nature, and only in 
the last accomplishment return to her. The true meaning of 
this seems to be no other than the following: — In all things 
in nature the living principle appears only blindly effective; — 
if it were so with the artist, he would not be distinguish- 
able from nature itself. If it were his wish consciously to 
subordinate himself to nature, and to repeat things present 
with a slavish truth, he would produce masks (larvae) indeed, 
but no w(H*ks of art. Thus he must remove himself from the 
result, from the creature, that he may elevate himself to the 
creative energy, and spiritually seize on that. 

By this means he elevates himself into the region of pure 
ideas ; he forsakes the creature, that he may regain it with 
thousand-fold interest, and in this sense certainly to return to 
nature. 

The artist should indeed, above all things, imitate that spirit 



10 ON THE BELATIOH BETWEEN 

of nature, which, working in the core of things, speaks by 
form and shape, as if by symbols; and only in so far as he 
seizes this spirit, and vitally imitates it, has he himself created 
anything of truth I For works which are the result of the 
mere connexion .of even beautiful forms would themselves be 
without all beauty, as that which gives beauty to the whole 
cannot be form. It is beyond form — it is the essential, the 
universal, the aspect and expression of the in-dwelling spirit (rf 
nature. 

We can now scarce doubt what is to be thought of this so 
universally demanded, so-called idealising of nature in art. 
This demand seems to have originated in that manner of 
thought which conceives the actual not to be truth, beauty, 
and goodness, but their contrary. If the actual were, indeed, 
opposed to truth and beauty, the artist would be obliged, not 
to elevate and idealise, but rather to dispense with and destroy 
it, that he might create something true and beautiful. 

But how could anything beside the true be possible? And 
what is the beautiful, if not foIL and perfect being ? What 
higher aim could art then have than the representation of the 
actually existing in nature; and how could it affect to surpass 
the so-called actual nature, when it must ever remain behind 
her? Does art ever give to its works sensuous, actual life? 
This statue breathes not, is animated by no pulsation, is warmed 
by no blood; but both this professed surpassing, and this ap- 
parent inferiority, appear the consequences of one and the 
same principle, so soon as we place the aim of art in the imita- 
tion of the actually existent in nature. 

The works of art are only in appearance and on the sur- 
face animated; in nature, the vital principle seems to pene- 
trate more deeply, and entirely to unite itself with the material; 
but are we not taught by the constant change of matter, and by 
the universal fate of ultimate dissolution, the unessential cha- 
racter of this union, and that it is no perfect intermixture? 

Thus art presents, indeed, in its merely superficial anima- 
tion of its works, the non-essential as the non-essential. 



THE PLASTIC ARTS AND NATURE. 11 

How is it» that to every cultiyated perception the so-called 
imitation of the actna!, though carried almost to illusion, 
appears in the highest degree untrue — ^indeed, has the appeao- 
ance of a spectre; while a work in which the idea is predomi- 
nant appeals to that perception with the full energy of truth — 
indeed, first sets us in the truly actual world? Whence does 
this arise, if not from the more or less clear c<»icepti(m that 
affirms the idea to be the only living power in nature, and 
that all else is beingless and empty shadow? 

By the same principle are explained all the opposite cases 
which are adduced as instances of the surpassing of nature by 
art. When it detains the fleeting course of years, when it 
unites the energy of full-developed manhood with the grace 
of early youth, or presents a mother, grown-up sons, and 
daughters, in the full po8sessi(m of energetic beauty, what does 
it but dissolve that which is unessential — time? 

If in accordanoe with the remark of the discerning critic, 
every growth of nature has but one moment of perfect beauty, 
we may also say that it has but one moment of full existence. 
In this moment it is what it is in eternity; besides this, there 
is but an approach thereto and a falUng therefrom. 

Art, in that it presents the object in this moment, withdraws 
it from time, and causes it to display its pure being in the form 
of its eternal life. 

So soon as we have deprived form by our theories of all that 
is positive and essential, it must appear as restrictive and in 
a manner hostile to the essence; and the same theory which 
had produced the false and weak idealising must tend neces- 
sarily at the same time to the formless in art. Form would 
indeed be restrictive of the being or essence if it were present 
independent of it; but it exists by and through the essence; 
and how could that feel itself restricted by that which it 
creates ? It might indeed be injured by form which was forced 
upon it, but never by that which flows from itself; muoh 
rather must it rest content in this, and therein recognise its 
self-sufficmg and self-included nature. 



12 ON THE RELATION BETWEEN 

Determinate form is in nature never negative, but always 
afi&rmative; in the general way, you think of the form of a 
thing as a limit within which it is contained; but if you 
regard the creative energy, you will perceive that it is a 
measure which it gives itself, and in which it appears as a truly 
thinking power. For universally is the power of self-restriction 
considered an excellence, as indeed one of the highest. 

In the same manner most persons regard the single, or se- 
parate, as negative — ^viz., that it is not the whole or all ; but 
nothing separate becomes so by its limitation, but by the in- 
dwelling energy by which it affirms its own entirety, in oppo- 
sition to the whole. 

As this energy of singleness, and thus also of individuality, 
presents itself as the living character, the negative conception 
of it necessarily introduced into art an unsufficing and Mse 
view of the characteristic. 

Dead, and of intolerable hardness, were that art, which 
would represent the empty shell or limitation of the individual: 
we desire certainly to see, not the individual — we desire more 
— the living idea thereof. 

When, however, the artist recognises the aspect and being of 
the in-dwelling creative idea, and produces that, he makes the 
individual a world in itself — & species, an eternal type; he who 
has seized upon the essential need not fear hardness and seve- 
rity, for they are the conditions of life. 

Nature, which appears in her full development as the high- 
est mildness, we see tending in every single product towards 
determination, and is at first, before all else, hard and con- 
fined. 

As the entire creation is but a work of the highest mani- 
festation, the artist must first deny himself, and descend into 
the particular, not shunning the remoteness nor the pain, nay, 
torment of form. From her first works nature is threughout 
characteristic: the power of fire, the flash of light, she conceals 
in the hard stone; the pure soul of melody in severe metal; 
even on the threshold of life, and while meditating on organic 



THE PLASTIC ARTS AND NATURE. 13 

fona, she sinks, overpaweped by the might <]f fonn^ into: petri- 

^etion.' 

r The life of the plant consists ia a quiet receptivity;, but to 

what accurate and severe limits is this passive life con£ned ? 

In the animal kingdom the conflict between the life and 
form seems first to begin; indeed, her first works she conceals in 
hard shells; and where these are laid aside, by the constructive 
instinct, she joins the animated world to the domain of crys- 
tidizations; at last she steps forth more boldly and fireely, and 
active living charaoters appear, which are the same through 
the whole species. Art, indeed, cannot commence so deep as 
nature. 

If beauty is everywhere present, there are also different de- 
uces of appearance and development of the being or esssence; 
and thus of beauty; but art requires a certain fulness of beauty, 
and will not strike a single tone or sound, nor even a separate 
accord, but the whole full-voiced harmony, of beauty at once. 
Therefore does it seize immediately, and with the greatest 
delight, on the highest and most fully developed — the human 
form — ^for, as it is not granted to art to embrace the immeasur- 
able whole, and as in all other creatures merely fulgurations, 
but in man alone full and entire being, without fault appears, 
it is not only allowed, but called upon to behold all nature in 
man. 

But even for the very reason that it here assembles all in 
one point, it repeats her entire maniformity, and retraces in an 
inner circle the same path that she proceeded on in her wide cir- 
cumference. 

Here arises the demand on the artist, first, to be true in the 
particular, that the whole may appear perfect and beautiful. 
Here it is to wrestle with that creative spirit of nature which . 
in the world of man. spreads character and form in infinite 
maniformity; 4md not in loose and weak, but in strong and 
courageous, . conflict. 

A constant practical perception of that by which the quali-. 
ties of things become positive must keep him fi*om emptiness, 

c 



14 ON THE RELATION BETWEEN 

% 

weakness, and inward ncmentity, before he can venture, by a 
still higher connexion and ultimate intermeltmg of manifold 
forms, to arrive at the highest beauty in forms of the greatest 
simplicity, and of infinite fulness and content. 

Only by the perfection of form can form be annihilated; and 
this is certainly, in the characteristic, the ultimate aim of 
art. 

As,' however, an apparent coincidence is to the empty soul 
of more easy attainment, however internally worthless, so in art 
is the quickly attained external harmony void of all fulness of 
content; and thus theory and instruction have to counterbalance 
the unintellectual imitation of beautiful forms, and chiefly that 
inclination to an effeminate and characterless art, which indeed 
gives itself higher names, but only thereby covers its incapacity 
of fulfilling the first conditions of art. 

That elevated beauty, in which the fulness of form annihi- 
lates form itself was adopted by the new theory of art, after 
Winkelmann, not only as the highest, but as the only standard. 
But as the deep ground on which it rests was overlooked, it 
happened that from the essence of an all-affirming idea a 
negative one was conceived. 

Winkelmann compared beauty to water drawn from the 
bosom of the spring, which the less taste it had, the purer it 
was esteemed. 

It is true that the highest beauty is characterless; but is so, 
as we say of the universe, that it has no determinate dimen- 
sion, neither length, breadth, nor depth, because it contains all 
in a like infinity; or that the art of creative nature is formless, 
because it is subjected to no form. In this, and in no other 
sense, can we say that the art of the Hellenists, in its last 
perfection, elevated itself to the characterless. But it did not 
tend inmiediately to this. From the restraints of nature it 
elevated itself first to a godlike freedom; no light, self-sown 
seed, but a deep-planted kernel was necessary to the growth 
of that heroic plant. 

Only mighty emotions ci the feelings, only deep-sturings of 



THE PLASTIC ARTS AND KATURE. 15 

the fancy, by the conception of an all-mling power in natore, 
€ould implant that unconquerable energy in art, with which it, 
from the harsh and confined severity of the early forms, to the 
works of overflowing, sensuous grace, departed not from truth, 
and intellectually created the highest essential reality which it 
is granted to mortals to behold. 

As their tragedy commences with the great character in 
morals, so their plastic art began with the eeventy of nature ^ 
the stem goddess of Athens was its first and only Muse. 
This epoch is marked by that style which Winkelmann deno- 
minates the harsh and severe, from which the next, or high 
style, could only develc^ itself by the elevation of the cha- 
racteristie to the noble and simj^e. Thus, in figures of the 
most perfect or godlike natures, not only must every frdness of 
form of which human nature is capable be present, but this 
presence must be of such a kind that we could ourselves 
imagine it in the world — viz., the lower qualities, or those 
referring to some subordinate peculiarity, must be compre- 
hended under a higher, and all under a hi^est, in which they, 
as particulars, reciprocally counteract each other, but in being 
and energy still subsist Thus, though we cannot call that 
high and self-sufficing beauty characteristic, in so far as we 
thereby denote confinement or limitation of appearance, still 
the characteristic works imperceptibly in it, as in the crysts^ 
which, thou^ translucent, has not the less its own texture ; 
every characteristic element weighs, though ever so softly, and 
tends to produce the elevated equip(»se of beauty. 

The outward basis of all beauty is the beauty of fona. ; but 
as form cannot be present without essence, so wherever form 
is, is also, in visible or appreciable jxresence, character. 

Characteristic beauty, then, is beauty in its parts, from 
which beauty is developed as its firuit. 

The essence, indeed, outgrows the form; but, even then, 
the char^teristic remains the ever-operative* groundwwk of 
beauty. 

That most excellent critic, to whom the gods have granted 



< 



16 <n^ THE RELATION BETWEEN 

■* 

nature as well as art for a ioBgdom, compares the oharaeteristicy 
in its relation to beauty, with the skeleton, m its relation to 
tKe living form. If we were to use this modt striking simile in 
oar sense, we should say, that the skeleton is not, in nature, 
septate &om the living whole, as in our liioughts; that, fii^m 
and soft, determining and determined, ejtch pre-sUppose the 
other, and could only co-exist; and that even therefore the living 
characteristic is the resulting form of the interaction of bones 
and ile^h, of action and passion. Though art, as well as nature, 
in her higher forms, withdraws the sca£^lding of bones from 
sight, it can never be opposed to form and b6a*ty, since it 
ceases not to form and determine both the one and' the other. 

But whether that high and unimpassioned beauty should 
remain the only canon in the arts, as it is the highest, seems 
to depend upon the degree of extent and fulness with which 
the particular art can work. 

Natnre, in her wide circumference, ever {H-esents the higher 
together with the lower; creating in man the godlike, it brings 
forth, in all other products, merely the material and ground of 
that ; which must be, that in opposition with it, true being as 
such may appear. To the more elevated order of men them- 
selves, the mass of mankind serves as a basis, in opposition to 
which is manifested in the few the pure innate divinity, in legis- 
lature, government, and foundation of religion. Thus, where 
art is more concerned with the maUiformity of nature, there it 
may and must make manifest, besides the highest degree of 
beauty, also its foundation, and in a manner its material, in its 
own forms. 

The different forms of art here first unfi^d themselves in 
the most important manner. Plastic, in the mote confined 
sense of the word, scorns to give its object space ; it contains 
it in itself. But even this forbids its further extension; indeed 
it is forced to display the beauty of the universe almost in one 
point. It must thus immediately strive after the highest, and 
can only arrive at maniformity separately, and by the most 
severe distinction of antitheses. 



THE PLASTIC ARTS AND NATURE. 17 

By separation of the purely animal in human nature, it suc- 
ceeds in forming, and that beautifully and satisfactorily, lower 
creatures, the truth of ^hich is taught us by the beauty of many 
of the Fauns of antiquity; it can even reverse its own ideal, 
and^ like the cheerful spirit of nature, parodying itself, as in 
the repletion of Silenus's form, appear, by playful and toying 
treatment, again free from the oppression of matter. 

But plastic is ever forced entirely to isolate its works, that 
it may be self-consistent and a world for itself, as there is no 
higher unity for it, in which the dissonance of the particular 
can be harmonised. 

On the other hand, painting can more measure itself with 
the world, and create in an epic difuseness. 

In an Biad there is room for a Thersites, and for what is 
there not room in the great heroic poem of nature and history? 
Here the individual makes no impression; the whole steps into 
its place, and that which is not beautiM in itself is made so by 
the harmony of the whole. If the highest degree of beauty 
were everywhere spread over a large painting, whicli combines 
its forms by the |»-escribed space, by light and shade, and by 
reflection, the result would be the most unnatural uniformity, for, 
as Winkelmann says, the highest idea of beauty is uniformly 
but one, and allows but few variations; the individual would 
then be preferred to the whole, instead of being everywhere sub- 
ordinated to it, where the whole is the result of many parts. 

Thus, in such a ^ork, degrees of beauty must be observed, 
by which the full beauty concentrated in the mid point becomes 
visible, and from a preponderance in the particulars the balance 
of the whole arises. 

Here the confined characteristic finds its place, and theory 
should not so much direct the artist to that narrow spot where 
all beauty is centrically assembled, as to the characteristic 
maniformity of nature, by which alone he can give to a great 
work the fulness of vital significance. 

Thus thought, among the modem founders of art, the glorious 
Leo. da Vinci ; thus, that master of elevated thought, Raffaelle, 

c2 



18 ON TH£ RELATION BETWEEN 

who preferred to give even small particulars of the character- 
istic, to appearing uniform, lifeless, and unreal; he has not 
only understood to i»roduce these, but also to break their uni- 
formity by a difference of expression. 

Thus, although character can express itself in the quiet and 
balance of form, it is in its activity that it is first actually vital. 
By character we figure to ourselves an unity of many energies, 
which constantly operates to produce a certain balance and 
determinate measure for them, which is corresponded to^ when 
unagitated, by a similar balance of fonn. But if this living 
unity must display itself in action and motion, it must be when 
the energies are aroused by some cause to tumult and step out 
of their equipoise. £very one knows that this is the case with 
the passions^ 

Here we are met by the well-known demand of theory, which 
desires that the expression of passion should be moderated, as 
much as possible, in the actual outburst ; that the beauty of 
form be not thereby injured. 

We believe that we must rather reverse this rule, and ex- 
press it thus: that passion must be moderated by beauty itself; 
for it is much to be feared that the desired moderation will be 
understood negatively, while the true demand is, that a posi- 
tive force should be opposed to that of the passions. 

For, as virtue consists, not in the absence of the passions, 
but in the power of the spirit over them, so beauty is not pre- 
served by the banishment or moderation V)f them, but by the 
power of beauty over them. The power of the passions must 
actively display itself; it must be evident that they might rage 
ungovernably, but that they are repressed by force of charac- 
ter, and confined to the forms of firm and fixed beauty, as the 
waves of a stream, which break upon the brinks that they ever 
fiiU, but never over-pass. 

Otherwise this enterprise of moderation might be compared 
to that of those wretched moralists, who, the better to govern 
man, corrupt his nature, and banish everything positive from his 
actions so completely, that the people gloat on the appearance 



TH£ PLASTIC ARTS AND NATUBE. 19 

of a great crime, that they may refresh themselves by the aspect 
of something positire. 

In nature and art, the essence first strives afiter actaality or 
expression of itself in the particular ; therefore, the greatest 
severity of forms shows itself at the commencement of each ; 
for without limitation the limitless could not appear. If there 
were no severity, mildness could not exist; and if unity must 
be felt, it can only be by force of individuality, isolation, and 
antagonism. At first, therefore, the creative 8|»rit a|^)earB lost 
in the form, unapproachably locked up, and, even in the great, 
still austere ; the more, however, it succeeds in uniting in one 
oreature its whole frdness, the mc»re it parts with its austerity ; 
and where it has iully developed the form, so that it rests in 
and is satisfied with it, the more it contains itself within it, and 
seems in a manner to rejoice, and begins to move in soft lines. 

This is the state of the most beautifiil flowers and fruits; 
where the pure vehicle stands perfect, the spirit of nature be- 
comes fr*ee from its bonds, and feels its relation to the soul. 
_ As by a feint blush rising over the whole countenance, the 
appro£U2hing soul announces itself; as yet it is not there, but all 
things prepare themselves, by the soft play of tender move- 
ment, for its reception ; the rigid outlines melt, and moderate 
themselves into soft ones; a lovely essence, that is neither sen- 
suous nor spiritual, but yet incomprehensible, spreads itself 
over the form, and enfolds all the outlines and tortuosities of 
the parts. ' 

This essence, incomprehensible, as we have said, and yet 
appreciable by all, is what the Greeks called " charis," and we 
grace. Where, in a ftdly developed form, grace appears, there, 
on the side of nature, is the work perfect; all demands are fril- 
fiUed, 

Here already soul and body are in perfect harmony ; body 
is the form, and grace the soul; not the soul in itself, but the 
soul of form, the soul of nature. 

Art may linger on this point; nay, stand on it; for already 
from one side is its whole task accomplished. The pure image 



20 ON THE RELATION BETWEEN 

of beauty, arrested at this stage of development, is the goddess 
of love. But the beauty of the soul itself, incorporated in 
bodily grace, this is the highest deification of nature. The 
spirit of nature is but apparently opposed to the soul, and is in 
fact the instrument of its manifestation, it forms, indeed, the 
antithesis of things, but only that thereby the unity of being, as 
the highest grace and atonement of all powers, should ensue. 

All other creatures are supported by the spirit of the world, 
and thereby maintain their individuality. In man alone, as in 
a mid point, rises the soul, without which the world would be 
as nature without the sun. 

The soul, then, is not the individualising principle in man, 
but that by which he elevates himself above all sel&ess; it is 
that by which he is capable of self-sacrifice and disinterested 
love, and, what is the highest still, of the contemplation and 
perception of the being of things, and thus of art. 

The soul is not concerned with matter, nor immediately 
connected with it, but only with the vital spirit, as the life of 
things. Although appearing in the body, it is free from the 
body, the consciousness of which only hovers over it like a light 
dream, in the most beautiful shapes, by which it is not dis- 
turbed. It is no property, it is no possession, nor anything of 
limits; it knows not, but is itself knowledge; it is not good, 
but goodness itself; it is not beautifol, but is beauty in its 
essence. 

Primarily or secondarily, the soul of the artist shows itself, 
indeed, in his work, by the invention in the particulars and in 
the whole, when it hovers as unity in peaceful stillness over it. 
It should, however, be visible in the performance as the original 
power of thought, when human beings, fully informed with an 
idea, are offered to a worthy contemplation, or as in-dwelling 
and essential goodness. 

Both find their evident expression even in the most peacefril 
condition, but more lively, however, when the soul displays 
itself in action and opposition; and, as it is chiefly the passions 
which destroy the peace of life, it is universally received, that 



THE PLASTIC ARTS AND NAflTRE. ^ 

the beauty of the *ml chiefly shows itself bf p^ifeeM p6Wfel- 
fa the stonn of the passions. =' 

^"^ But here mi important distinction must be made. ' The 6oid 
i!niist not be called upon to moderate those passiods whidi B|*e 
liierely the outburst of lower powers of nature, n(» can'it be 
displayed in oppositton to them; for, where cdnSciousnei^S' still 
strives with them, the soul itself has not yet risein. - ' • 

Those passions mttst be moderated by the nature of maA, by 
the power of the spirit of niature. ' •> 

But there are higher occasions, when riot merely a. single 
power, but when the conscious spirit ItseHJ breaks' thr^^ ail 
risJstraint; occasions when eren tihle soul itself is subjected to 
the bond Which joins it to its sensuous existence— to the pain 
wluch should be unknown to its godl&e nature; when man 
finds he has to do, not merely with powers of nature, but with 
moral energies, and feels himself attacked at the very core of 
his being — when innocent error htcrries him into crime, and con- 
sequently into misery, and the deep-felt injustice calls the holiest 
feelings of humanity to revolt. This is the case in all truly, 
and, in an exalted Sense, tragic situations, as in those which are 
offered us by the tragedies of antiquity. If the blind energies 
of passion are aroused, the self-conscious spirit is also present, 
as the preserver of beauty; but if the spirit itself is hurried 
away as by an irresistible force, what power can here protect, 
watching over it, the holy beauty? Or, if the soul suffers, how 
can it save itself from torment and desecration? Arbitrarily to 
restrain the enei^ of pain, of tumultuous feeling, were to sin 
against the aim and intent of art, and would betray a want of 
feeling and soul in the artist himself. In that beauty, based 
upon grand and constant forms, has become characteristic, BXt 
has prepared for itself the means of manifesting the whole great- 
ness of feeling, without destruction of the symiftetry. 

F6r, where beauty rests upon mighty forms, as upcMl irre- 
moveable pQlars, a very small alteration of their relatioQi^ and 
one which scarcely affects the beauty itself, alloivs tis to infer 
the great fbrce which Wfes nfecess^ tobriAg it about.' f- ' '- 



22 ON THE RELATION BETWEEN 

Still more is pain sanctified by grace. It is necessary to the 
being of grace that it should be unconscious of itself; but as 
it cannot be arbitrarily acquired, so neither can it be arbitrarily 
lost; when an insupportable torment, when madness, inflicted 
by the avenging gods, hurries away consciousness and thought, 
it still stands by, as the protecting spirit, and prevents the suf- 
fering form from enacting anything ungraceful or unworthy of 
humanity; so that if it falls, it falls as a pure and unspotted 
sacrifice. 

Not yet the soul itself, but a presentiment of it, it produces, 
by natural means, what that does by a divine energy, in that 
it changes rigidity, nay, death itself, into beauty. 

Still this grace, though preserved in circumstances of the 
greatest diflficulty, would be dead without its glorification by 
the soul. 

But what expression can it have in this state? It delivers 
itself from pain, and steps forth victorious, not conquered, in 
dissolving its connexion with sensuous existence. 

The spirit of nature may call forth all its powers for its sup- 
port; the soul enters not upon this conflict, but its presence 
softens the storm of even the painfuUy struggling life. 

Every external force can deprive of external goods only, but 
cannot reach the soul; can destroy a temporal connexion, but 
not dissolve the eternal one of a truly divine love. 

Not hard or feelingless, nor relinquishing love itself, it rather 
displays it in pain, as the sense which outlives sensuous exist- 
ence, and thus elevates itself above the ruins of external life or 
fortune in divine glory. 

This is the expression of the soul, which the sculptor of the 
Niobe has shown us in his statue. Every means of art, by 
which the terrible can be softened, are brought into action; 
grandeur of form, sensuous grace; even the nature of the sub- 
ject softens the expression, in that the grief, surpassing all ex- 
pression, neutralises itself; and the beauty, which it seemed 
almost impossible vitally to preserve, is saved from injury by 
the commencing torpor. 



tHE PLASTIC ARTS AND NATURE. 23 

Yet what would all this be without the soul, and how does 
this manifest itself? We see upon the countenance of the 
the mother, not the grief alone for the flower of her children, 
already stretched upon the ground — not the mortal agony on 
account of the still surviving youngest daughter, who has flown 
to her bosom — not anger against the cruel deities — ^much less, 
as has been pretended, a cold defiance. We see all this, but 
not for itself, but through the grief, (he anger, and the anguish, 
streams the divine light, the everlasting love, as the last re- 
maining feeling; in this is presented the mother as such, who, 
not being one, still is, and by an eternal link remains, united 
with the beloved ones. 

Every one confesses that greatness, purity, and goodness of 
soul, have their sensuous expression; how were this conceiv- 
able, were there not, in the' active principle of matter, a soul 
of related and similar essence? 

Thus, in the delineation of the soul, there are again grada- 
tions in art, either as it is united to the merely characteristic, 
or visibly coalesces with the charming and graceful. 

Who perceives not, in the tragedies of Eschylus, the same 
high morality to prevail that dwells so naturally in the works 
of Sophocles? but in the former it is enveloped in a severe veil, 
and conununicates itself less to the whole, because the link of 
sensuous grace is wanting. 

Yet from this severity, and from the still terrible graces of 
early art, could proceed the grace of Sophocles; and therewith 
that perfect interpenetration of the two elements, which leaves 
us in doubt whether it be the moral or sensuous grace which 
enchants us in the works of this poet. 

This holds good of the productions of plastic art of the still 
severe style, in comparison with that of the later mildness. If 
grace, beside being the glorification of the spirit of nature, be 
also the means of connexion between moral goodness and sen- 
suous appearance, it is self-evident that art must tend from all 
sides towards it, as its centre. 

This beauty, which results from the perfect union of moral 



24 ON THE RELATION BETWEEN 

goodness with sensuous grace, wherever we find it, seizes upon 
and enchants us with the power of a miracle. For as the spirit 
of nature elsewhere universally shows itself independent of, 
and, in a certain sense, opposing the soul, so here it seems, by 
a voluntary coincidence, and, as if by the inner fire of a di- 
vine love, to commingle with it; and the beholder is over- 
taken with sudden clearness, by the remembrance of the ori- 
ginal unity of the being of nature and of the soul, by the certainty 
that all antithesis or opposition is but apparent — that love is 
the bond of all being, and that pure goodness is the ground 
and signification of the whole creation. Here art seems to go 
beyond itself, and to make itself again a means to itself. 

At this height, sensuous grace becomes merely veil and body 
to a still higher life; what was before a whole is treated as 
a part; and the highest relation of art to nature is thereby 
arrived at, in that it makes nature the medium of manifesting ^ 
the soul in itself. 

But if here, in the flower of art, all former stages repeat 
themselves (as in the flower, in the vegetable kingdom), still, 
on the other side we may perceive in what difierent direction 
art may proceed from this centre. In particular, the natural 
difference of the two forms of creative art shows itself, here, 
in its greatest force. For, in plastic, the highest seems neces- 
sarily (in that it manifests its ideas by corporeal things) to 
consist in the perfect equipoise between the soul and matter; if 
it gives to the latter the preponderance, it sinks beneath its 
own idea; but quite impossible does it seem to elevate the soul 
at the cost of matter, since thereby it must overpass itself. 

The perfect sculptor will indeed, as Winkelmann says on 
occasion of the Belvedere Apollo, neither take more material 
than is necessary for the execution of his intellectual intent, 
nor, on the other hand, lay more energy in the soul than is at 
the same time expressed in the material; for even therein con- 
sists his art, that he expresses the intellectual corporeally. 

Thus, sculpture can only attain its highest excellence in 
natures whose idea it brings with it — ^natures in which every 



THE PLASTIC ARTS AND NATURE. 25 

thing that they are in the idea, or soul, can at the same time 
be liketvise in actuality; consequently, in godlike natures. 

Thus, had no mythology preceded it, art would of itself 
have arrived at and invented gods, had it not found them; 
further, since the spirit, in its lower developments, has the 
same relation to matter that we have given the soul, in that 
it is the principle of action and movement, as matter is of rest 
and action, the law of moderation in the expression of the 
passions becomes one flowing from the grounds of its nature; 
but this law applies not only to the lower passions, but also to 
those, if the expression may be allowed, more elevated and 
divine, of which the soul is capable in rapture, devotion, or in 
reverence; thus, because the gods only are free from these 
passions, art would be attracted, from this side also, to the pro- 
duction of godlike natures. 

Painting, however, seems to me quite differently constituted 
from sculpture; for the former represents not by bodily things, 
but by light and shade, by an immaterial, and in a certain 
sense intellectual means; it offers its works, too, by no means as 
the things themselves, and wishes them to be looked upon ex- 
pressly as pictures; it therefore lays not that stress upon the 
material, in and for itself, that sculpture does; and appears, 
from this cause, when elevating the material above the spirit, 
to sink deeper below itself than, in a like case, sculpture does: 
on the other hand, it appears, with the greater propriety, to 
give an evident preponderance to the spirit. 

In instances where it strives after the highest, it will cer- 
tainly ennoble the passions by character, moderate them by 
grace, or manifest the power of the soul in them; but on the 
other hand, those higher passions which depend upon the rela- 
tion of the soul to a superior being are frdly siuted to its 
nature. 

If sculpture frdly weighs that power, by which a being 
exists externally, and by which it operates in nature, against 
that by which it operates inwardly, and lives as a soul, and 
thus shuts out mere passivity, even from matter, so, on the other 

D 



26 ON THE RELATION BETWEEN 

hand, may painting, here, moderate to the advantage of the 
soul the character of power and action, and change it into that 
of resignation and patience, through which, it appears, that 
man is more fitted to receive the impressions of the soul and 
general higher influences. 

From this opposition alone, the predominance of sculpture 
in the ancient, and of painting in the modem world, explains 
itself, since the mode of thought in the former was thoroughly 
plastic, while that of the latter makes the soul the passive organ 
of higher revelations. This also is evident, that the endeavour 
afber the plastic in form and expression is bj no means suf- 
ficing; that, before all things, it would be necessary, that we 
thought and felt in the antique manner, t. e. plastically. But 
if the deviation of plastic into the sphere of painting is an 
injury to art, so also is the subjugation of painting to the con- 
ditions and requirements of sculpture an imposed limitation, 
equally arbitrary. For, if the former, like gravitation, tends 
to one point, the latter may, like the creative light, fill the 
whole universe. 

This unlimited universality of painting is proved by its his- 
U>ry itself, and by the example of the greatest masters, who^ 
without injury to the essential nature of their art, have yet 
brought every particular branch of it to perfection; so that the 
same continous progress, wHch could be developed from the 
nature of the thing itself, we are also able to point out in the 
history of art. 

Not, indeed, in exact order of time, but yet of fact. For 
thus is represented by Michael Angelo the mighty epoch of 
liberated art, in which its yet unrestrained energy manifests 
itself in gigantic o£&pring, in accordance with the poetic imagery 
of a symbolical antiquity; the earth, after the embrace of 
Uranos, first brought forth Titans and heaven-storming giants, 
before the soft reign of the tranquil gods arose. 

Thus the last judgment, with which, as the brief abstract of 
his art, that intellectual giant filled the Sistine chapel, appears 
to remind us rather of tiie first ages of the earth than of tiie 



THE PLASTIC ARTS AND KATURE. 27 

lasi Deeply attracted by Ike most occult grounds of organic 
and chiefly of human form, he avoided not the terrible; indeed, 
he rather sought it purposely, and called it up from its rest, 
in the dark operations of nature. 

Want of tenderness, grace^ and pleasingness, he replaces* by 
the most extreme energy; and if he arouses terror by his deli-* 
neations, it is the terror which, as the old &ble says, the god 
Pan spreads around him, when he suddenly appears in the 
assemblies of man. Nature commonly produces the extraor- 
dinary by separation and exclusion of opposing qualities; thus 
it was necessary that earnestness and deep-thinking natural 
energy should, in the soul of ItGchael Angelo, outweigh the 
sense of grace and feeling, that the highest pure plastic energy 
might be manifested in modem art. After the softening of the 
first force and violent impulse of birth, the spirit of nature 
becomes more clear of soul, and the graces are bom. Art 
arrived at this stage of development, after Leo. da Vinci, in 
Correggio, in whose works the sensuous spirit is the effective 
groundwork of beauty; and this is not only apparent in the 
soft outlines of his figures, but also in his forms, which are 
most similar to the pure sensuous forms in the works of the 
ancients. Id him blooms the tme golden age of art, like that 
granted to the world under Ihe mild rule of Satum; here 
playftd innocence, joyful desire, and childlike pleasure, smile 
firom open and happy faces; here are celebrated the Saturnalia 
of art. 

The genial expression of this sensuous feeling is in the 
dair-obscure, which CJorreg^o has wrought out more than any 
other; for that which supplies to the artist the place of matter 
is shade; this is the material to trhich he must fasten the fleet- 
ing appearances of light and mind. 

Thus, the more light and shade are melted into one another, 
80 that of both there results but one being, as it were body and 
soul, the more the spiritual appears corporeally — ^the more the 
corporeal is elevated to the rank of spirit. 

After the limits of nature have been overcome, and the 



28 ON THE RXXATION BETWEEN 

exaggerated, the fruit of the first freedom, has been rejH'essedy 
and form and configuration have been endued with beauty hy 
the presentiment of the soul, the heavens clear up — ^the soft- 
ened earthly can unite itself with the heavenly, and this again 
with a softened humanity. RafiaAlle takes possession of joyftil 
Olympus^ and carries us away with him from the earth into 
the assembly of the gods — of the immortal happy beings. The 
bloom of the most cultivated life, the perftime of fantasy, toge- 
ther with the roots of the intellect, breathe jointly from out his 
works; he is not mere painter — ^he is, at the same time, poet 
and philosopher; the power of his soul stands at the side of 
wisdom; and, as he represents things, so are they ordered in 
the eternal necessity. 

In him has art reached its summit; and as the pure equi« 
poise of the divine and human can almost only be in one point, 
so it is in his works that that unique impress is to be found. 

From this point (that it might develop all possibility 
grounded in it) painting couM only proceed in one direction; 
and whatever was undertaken hy later revivafe of art, and in 
whatever difierent direction endeavour has been made, bat one 
seems to have succeeded in closing the circle of great masters 
with a kind of necessity. As the circle of the ancient fables 
of the gods closes with the modem one of Psyche, so could 
painting, by giving preponderance to the soul, accomplish one 
more stage in art, though not a higher one. 

This was the aim of Guido Reni, and he became in a pecu- 
liar manner the painter of the soul; thus, it appears to us> 
must be interpreted his entire endeavour, so often uncertain, 
and which in many of his works loses itself in vagueness. 
The key to this may be found, and perhaps in but few other 
of his works, in his masterpiece, in the gallery of our king, 
there open to the wonder of us all. In tlie form of the as- 
cending virgin is evOTy plastic harshness and severity, to the 
last trace, destroyed; mdeed, in her, painting itself appears, 
like the liberated Psyche, emancipated from hard fonns to 
flutter its own pinions in glory. 



THE PLASTIC ABTS AKD KATUBE. 29 

Here is no being that, with a decided natural power, works 
externally on nature ; everything in her expresses receptivity 
and quiet patience, even to that perishable flesh, whose pecu- 
liarity the Italian language expresses by morbidezza; quite 
different from that with which Raffaelle endows his descending 
Queen of Heaven, as she appears to the adoring pope and saint. 

If, indeed, there is any ground for Hie assertion, that the 
original of the female heads in Guide is the antique Mobe, the 
reason of the similarity lies, certainly not in intentional imita- 
tion; perhaps a similar endeavour may have led to like means* 
If the Florentine Mobe is the extreme of plastic, and the ex- 
pression of passion Hierein, so our well-known picture is the 
extreme of painting, which here seems to lay aside the very 
want of shadow and obscurity, and ventures to work aknost in 
pure light. 

Yet Hiough painting may be allowed, on account of its par- 
ticular constitution, to lay an evident stress upon the soul, it 
would still be better for theory and doctrine ever to tend to* 
wards that synthesis from which alone art may ever be new 
begotten; since, on tiie side of the last-mentioned stage of 
develq)ment, it must ever be stationary, or deteriorate into a 
confined mannerism. 

For, even that exalted passion is inconsistent with the idea 
of a perfectly energetic being, whose ima^e and reflection it is 
the calling of art to display. A right feeling will ever rejoice 
in beholding a being individually, nobly, and, as fur as possible, 
self-developed; yea, the Godhead would look down with plea- 
sure upon a creature who, gifted with a pure soul, maintained, 
in the external world, the dignity of his nature by his sen- 
suous active existence. 

We have seen how the work of art, growing up from the 
depths of nature, commences with determination and confine- 
ment, developes internal infinity and frdness, and at last, puri- 
fying itself to grace, finally arrives at soul; but that which in 
the creative act of mature art is but one operation, must be 
conceived disjointedly. 

d2 



80 ON THE RELATION BETWEEN 

No theory or rules can supply this spiritual power of produc- 
tion. 

It is the pure gift of nature which here, for the second time, 
concludes herself; in that she, returning upon herself, invests 
the creature with her creative power. 

But, as in the great progress of art each gradation follows 
the other, until in the highest they all become one; even so 
can, in the particular, no pure culture arise that has not de- 
veloped itself, in conformity with the law of nature, from the 
very seed and root. 

The demand that art, like every other living thing, should 
proceed from the first beginnings, and, that it may vitally re- 
produce itself, should ever return back to these, may seem 
a hard doctrine, in an age to which it is so often said, that it 
may take the most perfect beauty from existing works of art, 
ab-eady at hand; and thus, with one step, arrive at the last 
excellence. Have we not already the excellent, the perfect — 
why, then,, should we return to the initiative and undeveloped? 

Had the great founders of modern art thought thus, we 
indeed should never have seen their wonders; before them 
also stood the works of antiquity — round statues and bas- 
reliefs — ^which they might have directly transferred to their 
pictures. 

But this appropriation of a beauty, not earned by itself, and 
so not understood, satisfies not an instinct of art^ which tends 
directly to the original, and from this, in freedom and primal 
energy, developes for itself the beautiftd. 

They shunned not to appear simple, artless, and dry, beside 
those exalted ancients; nor to nourish art, long in the un- 
apparent bud, until the time of grace arrived. 

Whence comes it, that we still behold the works of those 
ancient masters, from Giotto to the teachers of Rafiaelle, 
with a kind of worship, and even partiality, if not, because 
the faithfulness of their endeavour, the grand seriousness of 
their quiet and voluntary confinedness, forces from us om* esteem 
and wonder? 



THE PLASTIC ARTS AND NATURE. 31 

Id the same position that these stood to the ancients, stands 
the present race to them. 

Their time and ours is joined by no vital tradition — by no 
link of organically-continued culture ; we must reproduce art 
in their manner, but with peculiar individual energies, if we 
would be like them. 

Even that after-summer of art, at the end of the 16th and 
conmiencement of the 17th centuries, was able indeed to call 
forth a few new flowers from the old stem, but no fruitful seed, 
much less to plant a new stem of art. But to set aside the 
works of full-developed art, and to hunt up its still simple 
and homely commencements, to imitate them, as some have 
wished, this were a new, and perhaps still greater, misunder- 
standing; this would not be going back to the original, and 
thus simplicity would become affectation and mere hypocritical 
show. But what prospect would the present time offer to an 
art, springing from a fresh germ and root? Art is, indeed, in 
a great measure, dependent upon the temper of the times; and 
who dare promise to such serious beginnings the praise of the 
present, while art scarce arrives, on the one side, to equal 
estimation with other means of extravagant luxury; and while, 
on the other, artists and amateurs, with a complete incapacity 
to comprehend nature, yet praise and demand the ideal? 

Art arises from that most lively movement of the spirit and 
feelings which we call enthusiasm. 

Everything which, from small or difficult beginnings, has 
risen to great power and height, has done so by enthusiasm; 
thus it is with kingdoms and states, arts and sciences. 

The power of the individual is insufficient — the spirit only, 
which spreads itself through the whole body, can accomplish 
it; for, as the more tender plants are dependent upon the air 
and weather, so is art most completely on the general feeling; 
is stands in need of an universal enthusiasm for the elevated 
and beautiful; such as that which, in the Medicean age, like 
the warm breath of spring, called forth at once, and on the 
spot, all the great spirits; of a constitution, like that which 



32 ON THE BELATION BETWEEN 

Pericles delineates in his praise of Athens, and which the 
mild govemment of a paternal ruler grants to ns, far more 
sorely and certainly than could any democracy; of a constitution, 
where every energy is in voluntary action, where every talent 
shows itself with joy, because everyone is valued at his worth; 
where subserviency is shame, where the conunon place brings 
no praise, but where all strive after a high-placed and extra- 
ordinary aim. 

Then only — ^when public life is animated by the same power 
by which art is elevated — ^then only can art expect advancement 
from it; for art cannot, without forfeiting tibie nobility of its 
nature, direct itself towards any outward consideration. 

Art and science can only revolve on their own axes. The 
artist, like every intellectual operator, can only follow that law 
which God and nature have written in his heart, — no other. 

No one can help him, he must help himself; neither can he 
be externally rewarded, for that which he has not brought 
forth for its own sake is worthless. 

For this cause also, no one can even direct him, or prescribe 
the way for him in which he should walk. If he is greatly to 
be pitied when he has to combat with his time, he equally 
deserves contempt when he fawns upon it. And how can he 
accomplish even this ? Witibiout a great and universal enthusiasm, 
there is but a sectarian and no public opinion — ^no fixed taste, 
no great idea of a whole people; but tibie voices of single and 
arbitrarily established judges pronounce upon merit; and art, 
which, in its elevation, is self-sufficing, fawns for favour, and 
becomes a servant where it should be dictator. 

To difierent ages is accorded a different inspiration. Dare 
we expect none for the present time, while the new, now self- 
forming world as it ahready exists, partly externally, partly in- 
ternally, and in feeling, can no longer be estimated by all the 
measures of past opinion? While rather all things seem to call 
aloud for greater things, and thus to proclaim an entire reno- 
vation, should not that spirit, to which nature and history is 
again vitally opened, also give back to art its great objects? 



THE PLASTIC ARTS AND NATURE. 33 

To grope among the ashes of expu-ed fires, and from them to 
wish agam to kindle an universal flame, is a vain endeavom*. 
A change alone, which shall take place in ideas themselves, is 
capable of elevating art from its exhausted state; a new know- 
ledge, making possible a new faith, is alone capable of in- 
spiring it to the work, by which in a new life it may reveal a 
glcay like that of old. 

An art, indeed, which should be in all respects the same as 
that of former centuries, will never recur, for nature never 
repeats herself. 

Such a Rafiaelle will never be again; but another, who, in 
a like individual manner, will arrive at the highest in art. 

Let only those primary conditions be not wanting, and re- 
animated art will, like the earlier, show forth in its first works 
the aim of its destiny. In the culture of the truly character- 
istic, it developes itself from a fresh original power; grace, 
though veiled, is still present, and in both is the soul already 
prefigured. Works that arise in such a manner are, even in 
their commencing incompleteness, necessary and immortal. 

We venture to confess it, that in this hope of a new birth 
of an entirely characteristic art we have our fatherland chiefly 
in view. Did not, at the same time that art awakened in 
Italy, from our native Germany arise that vigorous growth of 
art. in our great Albert Durer; how peculiarly German, and 
yet how closely related to those whose sweet fruit the milder 
sun of Italy brought to the highest maturity! 

This people, from whom has proceeded the revolution in the 
mode of thought of Europe, whose intellectual power is testi- 
fied by the greatest discoveries; who have given laws to the 
heavens, who of all have most deeply studied the earth; in 
whom nature has implanted an unperverted sense of right, and 
a love of the knowledge of first causes, deeper than in any 
other — this people, must end in a characteristic art. 

If the state of art is dependent upon the universal fate of 
the human mind, with what hope may we contemplate our 
peculiar fatherland, where a noble governor has given to the 



34 ON THE RELATION, ETC. 

understanding freedom, to the spirit wings, and realization to 
the ifieaa of philanthropy; while a pure people still preserve 
the liying germs of ancient art, and with them the ancient 
seats of old German art. 

The very arts and sciences, were they elsewhere universally 
banished, would find an asylum under the shelter of that throne 
on which mild wisdom directs the sceptre; which graciousness 
as a queen adorns; which an hereditary love of art makes illus- 
trious; by which the young prince, who this day receives tihie 
acclamations of a grateful country, has become the wonder of 
foreign nations; here would they find the seed of a future and 
vigourous existence universally difiused; here already proved 
community of fiseling, and firm among the changes of time^ 
at least the bond of one love, of one universal enthusiasm; of 
that for the fatherland and for the king, for whose health and 
preservation, to the utmost limit of human years, can, to-day, 
more ardent wishes nowhere rise than in this temple, which he 
has erected to the sciences. 



LONDON : 

RBDINQ AND JUDD, PRINTERS, 4, HORSE SHOE COURT, 

LUDOATB HILL. 



Works already Published, 

CHRISTIANITY ; or, Europe. By Novalis (Friedeich Von 
Hardenbero). Translated from the German, by the Rev. J. 
Dalton. In paper cover, 6d. 

ESSAYS. Second Series. By R. W. Emerson. With a Notice, 
by Thomas Carlyle. In paper cover, 3s. ; cloth, 3s. 6d. 

HISTORICAL SKETCHES of the OLD PAINTERS. By the 
Author of ** The Log-Cabin." In paper cover, 2s. 6d. ; cloth, 3s. 

The EMANCIPATION of the NEGROES in the BRITISH 
WEST INDIES. An Address delivered at Concord, Massachu- 
setts, on the 1st of August, 1844. By Ralph Waldo Emerson. 
In paper cover, 6d. 

SELF-CULTURE. By William Ellbry Channing. * In paper 
cover, 6d. ; cloth, Is. 

The LOG-CABIN ; or. The World Before You. By the Author 
of *' Three Experiments of Living," " Sketches of the Old Paint- 
ers," &c. In paper cover, Is. 6d. ; doth, 28. ; extra cloth, gilt 
edges, 2s. 6d. 

The RATIONALE of RELIGIOUS INQUIRY. By James 
Martineau. 



To be followed by 

The LIFE of JEAN PAUL FRIEDRICH RICHTER. Com- 
piled from, various sources. Together with his AUTOBIOGRA- 
PHY. Translated from the German. 

The Publisher of " The Catholic Series " intends it to consist 
of works of a liberal and comprehensive character, judiciously 
selected, and embracing various departments of literature. 

An attempt has been made by the Church of Rome to realise the 
idea of Catholicism — at least in form — and with but a partial suc- 
cess. An attempt will now be made to restore the word Catholic 
to its primitive significance in its application to this Series, and to 
realise the idea of Catholicism in spirit. « 

It cannot be hoped that each volume of the Series will be essen- 
tially Catholic, and not partial in its nature, for nearly all men are 
partial ; — ^the many-sided and tm-partial, or truly Catholic man, 
has ever been the rare exception to his race. Catholicity may be 
expected in the Series, not in every volume composing it. 

An endeavour will be made to present to the public a class of 
books of an interesting and thoughtful nature, and the authors of 
those of the Series wmch may be of a philosophical character will 
probably possess little in common, except a love of intellectual 
nreedom, and a faith in human progress ; — ^they will be united by 
sympathy of spirit, not by agreement in speculation. 



WORKS RECENTLY PUBLISHED BY JOHN CHAPMAN. 

DE WE'lTE'S CRITICAL and HISTORICAL INTRODUC- 
TION to the CANONICAL SCRIPTURES of the OLD TES- 
TAMENT. Translated by Theodore Parker. 2 vols. 8vo, cloth, 
£1 5s. 

A DISCOURSE on MATTERS pertaining to RELIGION. By 
Theodore Parker. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 

ENDEAVOURS after the CHRISTIAN LIFE. By James 
Martin EAU. 12mo, cloth, Ss. 6d. 

LECTURES on the HISTORY of CHRISTIANITY. By G. 
W. BuRNAP. 12mo, cloth, 7s. 6d. 

LIFE of CHARLES FOLLEN. ByMrs.FoLLBN. 12mo, cloth, 
6s. 6d. 

SELECTIONS from the WRITINGS of FENELON. With a 
Memoir of his Life. By Mrs. Follen. 12mo, cloth, 5s. 

SKETCHES of MARRIED LIFE. By Mrs. Follen. Royal 
8vo, sewed, Is. 4d. ; 12mo, cloth, gilt edges, 3s. 6d. 

DISCOURSES on HUMAN LIFE. By Orville Dewey. 
12mo, boards, 6s. 

AMERICAN MORALS and MANNERS. By Orville Dewey. 
8vo, Is. 

SKETCHES of the LIVES and CHARACTERS of the LEAD- 
ING REFORMERS of the SIXTEENTH CENTURY. By 
Edward Taoart. 8vo, cloth, 5s. 

The TESTS of TIME ; a Story of Social Life. By Sara Wood, 
A utho r of " Life's Lessons." Foolscap 8vo, cloth, 5s. 

HUMAN NATURE. A Philosophical Exposition of the Divine 
Institution of Reward and Punishment, which obtains in the Phy- 
sical, Intellectual, and Moral Constitutions of Man. 12mo, clotli, 
2s. 6d. 

CHANNING'S WORKS. Edited by Joseph Barker. Vols. 
I., n., m., and IV. To be completed in Six Volumes. Price, per 
Volume, Is. sewed ; Is. 4d. cloth. 

The OPINIONS of PROFESSOR DAVID F. STRAUSS, as 
embodied in his Letter to the Burgomaster Hirzel, Professor 
Orelli, and Professor Hitzio, at Zurich. 8vo, Is. 



Jtut Published, in Boyal 8vo, price 9d., 

A new edition of 

LECTURES to YOUNG MEN, on the CULTIVATION of the 
l^HND, the FORMATION of CHARACTER, and the CON- 
DUCT of LIFE. By G. W. BuRNAP. 

" This, we can foresee, is destined to become a household book, and it is a 
long" time since we met with any work better deserving of such a distinction. 
We do not know of any work on the same subject of eaual excellence, and those 
of our readers who are wise will buy and study it." — Tne Apprentice. 

In SvOf price 6d.f 

The YOUNG AMERICAN. A Lecture. By Ralph Waldo 
Emerson. 



