
RUSSIAN REVOLUTIONARY PAMPHLETS 



Lessons of the Revolution 



BY 



VLADIMIR OULIANOW 

(N. Lenin) 

President of the Council of People's Commissars. 



Translated from the Russian original, with Intro- 
duction and Appendix, and published by the Bureau 
of International Revolutionary Propaganda attached 
to the Commissariat for Foreign Affairs of the Pro- 
visional "Workmen's and Peasants 1 Government of 
the Russian Republic. 



Petrograd 




INTRODUCTION 

WHAT IS THE SOVIET? 



Of the many terms in which the social and political 
sciences abound, the term "people*' is perhaps the vagu- 
est. Indeed, we have no clear-cut image and hence no 
effective idea of this apparently concrete entity People. 
Intimately connected with this term, no less vague and 
still more confusing, is the word "government,'' a word 
depicting a reality as concrete and as hard as the age-old 
rocks themselves. The relation, however, obtaining be- 
tween these two realities is in one respect clear ; inasmuch 
as Jill the power of a people is vested in its government, 
the people is divested of all power — a relation so typi- 
cally, and as it were monumentally expressed in the cry, 
"L'etat e'est moi," desperately uttered by the head of 
the French government during the period of its ultimate 
decay. 

The Russian Revolution, now occupying the center of 
the quaking world's stage, allows the careful observer to 
catch a glimpse of what that entity People really must 
be. The Russian people, struggling to assert itself, has in 
the travail of the Revolution given birth to a new crea- 
tion, flexible, mobile and yet persistent as are the thought 
and will it expresses. This creation is, the Soviets, 




Library 

University of Texas 

Austin 



THE SOVIETS 

The trumpets of the March revolution, 1917, brought 
down the Romanov dynasty, and the rejoicing of the Rus- 
sian people knew no bounds. But the events immediately 
following had a sobering effect upon the masses. The 
first burning question arose: "Is the Revolution safe?" 
As the embodied answer to this question, sprang up the 
Soviet, a revolutionary creation, a child of the people's 
awakening consciousness. City, town and village, as well 
as each unit of the army, all formed their local Soviets 
to safeguard the Revolution. 

- These local organs,, always functioning and therefore 
always reflecting the thoughts, desires and will of the 
small communities they represent, send delegates to the 
capital, who form the Central Executive Committee of all 
the Soviets of Workmen's, Soldiers' and Peasants' Dele- 
gates. The election to the central body is carried out on 
the basis of party lines, so that the 0. E. K. has always 
represented all the various currents arid even undercur- 
rents of the Russian Revolution. 

Soon after the overthrow of Tsardom, the people felt 
that the newly-formed Provisional Government of Lvov- 
Rodzianko-Miliukov did not intend to deviate from the 
general policies of the old regime. This popular feeling 
imparted itself to the local Soviets, which resulted in the 
second question, "Who is friend and who is foe?" In 
other words, the Soviet was forced to explain the sense 
of the Revolution. The first answer was a fermentation 
within the Soviets, reflecting the people's questioning 
mind, and this fermentation ended in the cleavage of the 
Soviet forces. Materially the split manifested itself in 
the first "coalition government," headed by Kerensky. 

This second question was made more vital, insistent, by 
the Kornilov attempt. It grew more and more obvious to 

843230 



the people that the "coalition government" was merely 
an expression of the old order under a new name. In 
response to the growing popular unrest, the rift in the 
Soviet deepened; whatever elements irresistibly tended to 
the right were pushed out by popular pressure upon the 
left and the result was the July insurrection. The Soviet 
thus emphasized the popular interpretation of the sense 
of the Revolution : It is not merely a political revolution, 
but an economi co-social revolution, and whoever thwarts 
its course is the people's enemy. 

But if indeed this is the historical sense of the Revolu- 
tion, then arises a third question: By whom and How shall 
the issues of the Revolution be promoted and realized in 
life? Of course by the People, and by the power which 
expresses the People by the Soviets. Such was the cate- 
gorical answer given by the October uprising, which for- 
ever put an end to the policy of coalition and alliances of 
the real Revolution with the representatives of the dying 
old order. Thus by a process of elimination the Soviet 
was finally purified of elements leaning toward the right- 
a process which showed, that as the individual hesitates 
before, making his choice and stamping as his will one or 
the other of the ideas conflicting in his mind, so the Rus- 
sian people hesitated before it found and expressed its con- 
scious will And the Soviet made all this possible. 

In brief, these are the three phases passed through by 
the boviet— from birth to manhood: (1) It issued from 
/m v £ r J.} le ' drt of ^e people as guardian of the Revolution; 
(2) While growing, it served as the pendulum— the inter- 
preter of the Revolution; (3) Fully matured as the voli- 
tional and intellectual organ of its parent, the people, it 
became the reahzer of the issues of the Revolution. 

The superiority of the Soviet over any other form of 
representation is easily demonstrable. All government pre- 
tends to represent the will of the people. Now granted 
(for the sake of argument), that a people's will is as real 
as the will of an individual, and that it is the sum or re- 






sultant of the sundry wills composing it, it is manifest that 
no representative body can satisfactorily execute this com- 
posite will. 

As a matter of fact, the will of an individual is not easily 
satisfied by proxy. So that it may be tersely stated that 
the efficacy of a representative is inversely proportional to 
the numeric strength of the constituency represented. 

Viewed from this angle, it is obvious why an order of 
things that has become detrimental to the people at large 
can be perpetuated by a ''representative" government 
which has degenerated into a tool of the invisible govern- 
ment. The history of the War is very instructive in this, 
as in many other respects. It is now clear as day how the 
invisible power, the class owning and dominating the 
economic apparatus in all countries, owned also the repre- 
sentative government, and through it tried to perpetuate 
secret diplomacy, financial speculation, capitalistic exploi- 
tation of the masses, all factors inevitably leading to both 
internal and external wars — and all this in the name of the 
People, 

In the first place the Soviet is a local body, of the people 
and with the people. A member of^fluTSoviet represents 
no more than about five hundred votes. He can be at any 
time replaced, he is always in sight— no invisibles allowed. 
Furthermore, the Soviet works * ' centripetally ' ' — the cen- 
tral body is controlled by the periphery. In this respect 
the Soviet government may be compared to a central me- 
teorological bureau, whose usefulness and efficacy, whose 
very raison d'etre — is determined by the workings of the 
local weather bureaus. 

Indeed, history seems to show mankind a new form of 
State organization which closely approaches the demands 
of the people, and corresponds with the new order of things 
ushered in by the Russian Revolution. 

These last few days have brought here (in Petrograd) 
face to face these two types of representation — on one hand 
the Constituent Assembly, in which one man represents 
200,000 wills, and on the other, the All -Russian Soviets, 



6 

those direct guards, interpreters and promoters of the 
social revolution, whose each member is so closely connected 
with the very pulse of the people. The dissolution of the 
Constituent Assembly by the power of the Soviets stirred 
no ripple on the faces of the immense sea of the Russian 
masses; while the threatened curtailment of the powers of 
the Soviets, two months ago, destroyed the Provisional 
Government. 

Who does not realize how evasive language is? Present 
day representative government — the parliament — is so 
skilled in the handling of language that when the people 
clamor everywhere for peace, they are "persuaded" that 
peace can only be achieved by war ; when they want a liv- 
ing they are given it at a prohibitive cost, etc., etc. The 
Soviet, being close to the people, must express realities lit- 
erally, as the people itself expresses them. 

The Soviet is probably the most important contribution 
of the Russian Revolution, 



THE LESSONS OF THE REVOLUTION 

A revolution marks a critical transition in the life of 
great popular masses. Of course, only a fully matured 
crisis renders a real revolution possible and necessary. 
Moreover, even as a transition period in the life of a single 
individual teaches him much, leads him through an emo- 
tional stage suffused with new rich content, so also does a 
revolution teach a whole nation in a relatively short time 
highly instructive and valuable lessons. 

During a revolution millions and tens of millions of peo- 
ple learn in a single week incomparably more than in a 
whole year of every-day sluggish life. For at such critical 
moments in the life of a nation it becomes markedly evident 
which classes pursue certain aims, what are their relative 
forces, and the means at their command. 

Every conscious workman, soldier and peasant should 
attentively ponder the lessons taught by the Russian Revo- 
lution; the more so now, at the end of July, when it is 
manifest that the first phase of our revolution has ended in 
failure. 

I. 

Indeed, let us see what the masses of workmen and peas- 
ants have been fighting for in carrying the revolution into 
life. What have they been expecting from the revolution ? 
We all know that all along they hoped for freedom, peace, 
bread, land. 

Now what are the actual facts? 

Instead of freedom the arbitrary rule of the past is being 
restored. Capital punishment is being introduced at the 
front, peasants are brought to trial for " wilfully 7 ' seizing 
the landlord's lands. The printing establishments of the 
Labor press are raided. The Bolsheviks are arrested, not 



T 



8 



in frequently without accusation, or on the pretext of 
charges which arc simply calumnious. 

It may be argued that the persecution of the Bolsheviks 
is by no means a violation of freedom, since only certain 
persons on specific charges are thus persecuted. But such 
arguments bear the earmarks of premeditated untruth. 
For why should printing offices be raided, newspapers sup- 
pressed for the crimes of individuals, even if these crimes 
are proven and sustained by law? It would be altogether 
different if the government declared criminal the entire 
Bolshevik party, its ideas and views. But every one knows 
that the government of free Russia never could, and indeed 
never attempted to do anything of the kind. 

And look at the venomous slanders launched against the 
Bolsheviks! The newspapers of both landlords and capi- 
talists have been furiously attacking the Bolsheviks for 
their campaign against the war, against the landlords and 
against the capitalists. These newspapers openly demanded 
the arrest and prosecution of the Bolsheviks even before 
there was a single charge against a single Bolshevik, 

The people desire peace, But the revolutionary govern- 
ment of free Russia has resumed the war of annexations, on 
the basis of those very secret treaties which' the former 
Tsar Nicholas II concluded with the English and French 
capitalists, aimed at the spoliation of foreign nations by 
the Russian financial magnates, These secret treaties have 
never yet been made public. The government of free Rus- 
sia has entrenched itself behind wiles and tricks, but it has 
not yet proposed a just peace to all nations. 

Bread there is none. The menace of famine is imminent. 
It is an open secret how the capitalists and the rich loot 
the treasury on war orders (the war costs the people 50,- 
000,000 roubles a day I ) They reap enormous profits from 
the high cost of living, and absolutely nothing is being done 
toward improving the production and distribution of goods 
by and for the working class. The capitalists are more and 
more daring in locking out the workmen, throwing them on 
the street at a time when the people suffer from under- 
production. 



The overwhelming majority of the peasants throughout 
a long series of conferences have loudly and unequivocally 
announced their decision to proclaim as a crying injustice 
— nay more, as direct plunder- — the ownership of the soil by 
the powerful landlords. And the government which calls 
itself revolutionary and democratic persists in foiling the 
peasants' desires, in deceiving them with promises and de- 
lays. The capitalists for months harassed Minister of 
Agriculture Tchernov's measures for enacting laws pro- 
hibiting the sale and purchase of land; and when a law of 
this type was finally promulgated, the capitalists began a 
despicable campaign of calumny against Tchernov, which 
continues unabated. In its defense of the landlords the 
government has not recoiled from knavery ; it has deter- 
mined to proceed by law against the peasants for the ""wil- 
ful" seizure of land! 

Yes, the peasants are deceived, tjiey are persuaded to 
await the convocation of the Constituent Assembly; but 
the capitalists keep on postponing it. Now that the date 
for convocation has been, under pressure by the Bolshe- 
viks, set for the 30th of September, the capitalists openly 
resent such an "impossibly" short interval, and again in- 
sist upon postponing the Constituent Assembly. The most 
influential members of the party of capitalists and land- 
lords—the "Cadet" party, or the "Party of People V- 
such as (Countess) Panina, openly preach the postpone- 
ment of the Constituent Assembly until the end of the war. 

Have patience with the land question until the Constit- 
uent Assembly! With the Constituent Assembly w r ait un- 
til the end of the war! With the end of the war wait until 
complete victory is won! This is the program. So do the 
capitalists and landlords, holding as they do the majority 
in the government, laugh and scoff at the poor peasants. 

II. 

But how did all this come to pass in a land where the 
rule of Tsardom has been overthrown? In a country that 
is not free the people are governed by a Tsar and a hand- 




ful of capitalists, landlords, and bureaucrats elected by no 
one. 

In a free country the people are governed by* those whom 
they themselves have chosen for this very purpose. At the 
elections the people divide themselves into parties, and as 
a rule every class of the population forms its own party; 
thus the landlords, the capitalists, the peasants, the work- 
men have each their own parties. So, in free countries 
the government of a nation is shaped and influenced by the 
open struggle between parties and by their final agreements 
among themselves. 

After the overthrow of the Tsar's regime, February 27, 
1917, Russia for about four months was governed like a 
free country, namely by means of an open struggle be- 
tween freely organized parties and of free agreements 
among themselves. In order therefore to understand the 
development of the Russian revolution, it is most important 
to scrutinize the nature of the various parties, the interests 
they have been defending, and finally, the relations of 
these parties to one another. 

Ill 

After the overthrow of the Tsar's rule the power passed 
into the hands of the Provisional Government. The Pro- 
visional Government consisted of representatives of the 
bourgeoisie — that is to say the capitalists, with whom the 
landlords too joined hands. The party of the Cadets, the 
leading capitalist party, occupied first place as the ruling 
and state party of the bourgeoisie. 

It was not by sheer accident that the power came into 
the hands of this party, though of course it was not the 
capitalists who fought the Tsar's troops, who shed blood 
for freedom's sake, but the workmen, peasants, sailors and 
soldiers. The ruling power nevertheless fell into the hands 
of the capitalistic party, because the capitalist class had at 
its command the power of wealth, of organization, and of 
education. Since 1905, and particularly during the war, 
the capitalist class, together with its joint partner, the 



11 

landlord class, won great success in its work of organiza- 
tion. 

The Cadet party has always been monarchists, in 1905 
as well as all the years until 1917. After the people's vic- 
tory over the tyranny of Tsardom, this party proclaimed 
itself republican. Historic experience teaches that when- 
ever the people vanquishes its ruling dynasty, the capi- 
talist class is ready to be converted to republicanism, in 
order to preserve the privileges of capitalism and to assert 
its hegemony over the people. 

The Cadet party in words stands for the "People's Free- 
dom." In deeds this party stands for all that is capital- 
istic. No wonder all the landlords, the monarchists, the 
Black Hundreds were quick to join it. Proof i The press 
and the elections. Immediately after the revolution all 
the bourgeois press and all the Black Hundred press sang 
in complete unison with the Cadets. All the monarchist 
parties, fearful of overt acts, supported the Cadets in the 
elections — at least in Petrograd. 

Having thus seized the power, the Cadets spared no ef- 
fort to continue the war of annexation and spoliation begun • 
by Nicholas II, who had concluded secret treaties of alli- 
ance with the English and French capitalists. According 
to these agreements the Russian capitalists are promised, 
in case of victory, the occupation of Constantinople, Gali- 
cia, Armenia, etc. As to the people, the Cadet government 
fed it profusely on promises, postponing the solution of 
questions most important to the workmen and peasants un- 
til the Constituent Assembly, without however setting a 
date for its convocation. 

Making use of their liberty the people began to organize. 
The chief organizations of the workmen and peasants, rep- 
resenting the overwhelming majority of Russia's popula- 
tion, were the Soviets of Workmen's, Soldiers' and Peas- 
ants' Delegates, These Soviets sprang into existence dur- 
ing the days of the February revolution, and after a few 
weeks, in most of the large cities of Russia, as well as in 
many of the townships, all the conscious leading elements 



< 



12 

of the working class and the peasantry were united in the 
Soviets, 

The Soviets were elected without any restrictions what- 
ever. The Soviets were the real organization of the masses 
of the nation, of the workers and of the peasants. The 
Soviets were the real organizations of the enormous major- 
ity of the people. The workmen and peasants, in military 
uniform, were Tinder arms. 

It is manifest that the Soviets both could and must take 
over the entire governing power. Indeed there could and 
should have been no other government but that of the Sov- 
iets until the convocation of the Constituent Assembly. 
Only then would our revolution securely occupy the posi- 
tion of a really popular, really democratic revolution. Only 
then would the toiling masses, who really crave peace, who 
really are not interested in wars of annexation, be able 
resolutely and unflinchingly to enter upon a course of ac- 
tion which would immediately put an end to the war of 
annexations and bring about peace. Only then could the 
workers and peasants check and bridle the capitalists who 
pile up colossal war profits, having brought the country to 
the verge of collapse and famine. But within the Soviets 
only the minority of the delegates were on the side of the 
revolutionary party of the workers— the Bolsheviks, who 
^demanded the transfer of all the ruling power to the Sov- 
iets. [The majority of the delegates sided with the Menshe- 
viks and "Essers," who opposed such a transfer of power. 
Instead of superseding the government of the bourgeoisie 
by that of the Soviets, these parties advocated the support 
of the bourgeoisie by means of a coalition government. This 
policy of alliance with the bourgeoisie, pursued by the very 
parties which the nation blindly trusted and followed, the 
Essers and Mensheviks, reflects the whole revolutionary 
process undergone by the Revolution since its inception five 
months ago. 






• 



■ 



13 



IV, 



Library 

University of Texas 

Austin 




Let us first examine the history of this Esser and 
Menshevik policy of alliance with the bourgeoisie; then 
we shall consider the circumstances which led the people 
to repose confidence in these parties. 

V. 

The mutual understanding between the capitalists and 
the Essers and Mensheviks has become manifest, now in 
one form, now in another, all through the course of the 
Eussian revolution. 

In the latter part of February, 1917, soon after the 
nation had conquered and the rule of the Tsar had 
been overthrown, the capitalist Provisional Government 
included Kerensky as the " Socialist'' member. Now, Ker- 
ensky in point of fact has never been a Socialist- he was 
only a "Troudovik." Only in March, 1917, did he begin 
to figure among the Social Revolutionists, when such -a 
position was no longer dangerous nor unprofitable. It 
was, of course, the aim of the capitalist Provisional Gov- 
ernment to use Kerensky, then Vice-President of the 
Petrograd Soviet, as a link by which it could chain to 
itself the whole Soviet The Soviet— that is to say, its 
majority— consisting of Essers and Mensheviks, took the 
bait, and soon after the formation of the Provisional 
Government consented to support it "inasmuch as it ful- 
fills its promises." 

The Soviet regarded itself as the accountant, the comp- 
troller of the de'eds of the Provisional Government. But 
during all this time the Provisional Government did not 
make a single serious effort to foster the development of 
the revolution. It did absolutely nothing with regard 
to its own immediate task of convoking the Constituent 
Assembly; it has not yet presented the question to the 
locals, nor has it even established a central commission 
to elaborate this question. The Government's only care 
was: clandestinely to renew the predatory international 
treaties which the Tsar had concluded with the capitalists 

843230 



of England and France, cautiously and insensibly to 
thwart the course of the revolution, to promise every- 
thing and to accomplish nothing. The Essers and Men- 
sheviks of the "contact committee" played the role of 
fools lavishly fed on grand phrases, promises, "tomor- 
rows." Like the crow in the fable, the Essers and Men- 
sheviks succumbed to flattery, listened complacently to 
the capitalists f assurances that they highly esteemed the 
Soviets, and that they would not move a step without 
them. 

In reality, however, time passed and still the capital- 
ist government did nothing to further the revolution. 
On the contrary, it succeeded, against the revolution, in 
renewing or rather confirming the secret predatory 
treaties, and. in "reviving" them by additional no less 
secret negotiations with the diplomats of Anglo-French 
imperialism. It succeeded, against the revolution, in lay- 
ing the foundation for a counter-revolutionary organiza- 
tion of the generals and officers of the active army — or 
at all events in bringing them closer together. It suc- 
ceeded, against the revolution, in calling into existence 
an organization of merchants and manufacturers who, 
gradually yielding under the pressure of the workmen, 
began at the same time to harass production, and to 
prepare its complete cessation at the propitious moment. 

But the organization of the more advanced workmen 
and peasants within the Soviets unswervingly went for- 
ward. The best men of the oppressed classes felt that 
the Government, in spite of its understanding with the 
Petrograd Soviet, in spite of Kerensky's grandiloquence, 
in spite of the "contact committee," remained as ever 
the enemy of the ; people, the enemy of the revolution. 
The masses, too, felt that if the resistance of the capital- 
ists remained unbroken, the cause of peace, the cause of 
freedom, the very cause of the revolution would be irrep- 
arably lost. Impatience and vindictive passions rose high 
in the musses. 







On April 20-21 it burst. The movement broke forth 
elementally, spontaneously. It was so rigorously directed 
against the Government that one regiment fully armed 
went straight to the Marinsky Palace to arrest the min- 
isters. It was universally apparent that the Government 
could no longer hold out. The Soviets at that time could 
(and ought to) have taken the power into their hands 
without the least resistance from any quarter. Instead, 
the Essers and Mensheviks have supported the toppling 
capitalist Government, have ever more entangled them- 
selves in their "alliance policy," have takett ever more 
fatal steps leading to the ruin of the revolution. 

The revolution teaches all classes with a rapidity and 
thoroughness unknown in times of peace and everyday 
life. The capitalists, who are better organized, more 
expert in the business of class struggle and class politics, 
learned the lesson more readily than the other classes. 
Seeing that the position of the Government was untenable, 
they resorted to a method which since 1848 has been for 
decades practiced by the capitalists in order to befog, 
divide and finally to overpower the working class. This 
method is the so-called "coalition ministry," composed of 
bourgeois and of renegades from the Socialist camp. 

In those countries where freedom and democracy have 
existed side by side with the revolutionary movement 
of the workers— for example in England and France— 
the capitalists make use of this subterfuge, and very suc- 
cessfully, too. The "Socialist" leaders upon entering 
the bourgeois ministries, invariably prove mere figure- 
heads, puppets, simply a shield for the capitalists, a tool 
with which to defraud the workers. The "democratic 
and republican" Russian capitalists set in motion the very 
same scheme. The Essers and Mensheviks fell a victim to 
it and on May 6 a "coalition" ministry, with the par- 
ticipation of Tchernov, Tseretelli & Co. became an accom- 
plished fact. 

The fools of the Esser and Menshevik parties were 
jubilant, complacently basking ^s they did in the radi- 



ance emanating from the Ministerial glory of their lead- 
ers. _ The capitalists congratulated themselves on having 
obtained such formidable allies against the people as the 
"leaders of the Soviets' 7 — on having received from them 
the promise to support "aggressive action on the front;" 
in other words, the renewal of imperialistic predatory 
war, which had been interrupted for a while. Well did 
the capitalists know the impotence of these leaders; well 
did they know that the promises of the bourgeoisie- 
regarding control and organization of production, peace 
policy, etc. — would never be kept. 

And so it happened. The second phase of the develop- 
ment of the revolution, extending over the period between 
May 6 and June 18, fully satisfied the expectations of the 
capitalists as to their success in deceiving the Essers and 
Mensheviks. 

^ "While Pechekhonov and Skobelev (of the duped par- 
ties) were fooling both themselves and the people into 
believing highflown phrases that they would take away 
the capitalists' 100 per cent profit, that "their resistance 
is broken/' etc.— the capitalists went on fortifying them- 
selves. Nothing, absolutely nothing was done to check 
them, all during that time. The renegade ministers proved 
to be mere talking machines to blind the oppressed 
classes, and the entire governmental apparatus remained 
m the hands of the bureaucrats and the bourgeoisie. 
The notorious Palchinsky, assistant Minister of Commerce, 
was a typical representative of this machine, blocking 
as he did any and every measure directed against the 
capitalists. The ministers kept on chatting — and all 
remained as before. 

Minister Tseretelli was especially utilized by the 
bourgeoisie in its light against the revolution. He was 
dispatched to "pacify" Cronstadt, where the revolution- 
ists had dared to remove the commissar appointed by 
the Government. At that time the bourgeois press 
launched an incredibly clamorous, malicious, furious cam- 
paign of falsehood and invective against Cronstadt, accus- 
ing it el" intending to "split off from Russia"; repeating 




this and similar absurdities in a thousand variations, to 
frighten the petty bourgeoisie and the unsophisticated 
Philistines. The most typical representative of this dull, 
panic-stricken class, Tseretelli, innocently took the bait 
and energetically went to work to "subdue and pacify ?: 
Cronstadt, without realizing his own position as a minion 
of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie. In fact this 
man was a tool in bringing about an "understanding" 
with revolutionary Cronstadt, according to which the 
commissar of the place was not to.be appointed by the 
Government, but elected by the local citizens and only 
confirmed by the Government. With such miserable 
compromises, the ministers who had deserted Socialism 
to please the bourgeoisie, spent all their time. 

Thus, whenever a bourgeois minister could not possibly 
appear in defense of the Government, as for example, 
before revolutionary workers, or the Soviets, a "Social- 
ist" minister appeared (or rather, was sent) by the 
bourgeoisie— such as Skobelev, Tseretelli, Tchernov, etc. 
He conscientiously accomplished the bourgeoisie's job, 
defended the ministry, white-washed the capitalists^ be- 
fogged the minds of the people by repeating promises, 
promises, only promises — and ended by advising them to 
wait, wait, wait. 

Minister Tchernov was kept particularly busy bargain- 
ing with his bourgeois colleagues. Down to this very month 
of July, when after the shake-up of July 3-4 the new 
<4 crisis of power" took place, and the Cadets left the cab- 
inet, Minister Tchernov was always occupied with the use- 
ful, interesting, profoundly national work of "persuading" 
his bourgeois colleagues, of exhorting them to consent at 
least to a law prohibiting the purchase of land. Such a 
law had been solemnly promised to the peasantry at the 
Ail-Russian Congress of Peasants' Soviets in PetrogracI, 
but it remained only a promise. Tchernov was unable to 
fulfill it either in May Or in June. Only at the moment 
of the elemental wave of revolutionary explosion on July 
3-4, when the Cadets left the ministry— only then was Un- 
law put in force. But it proved to be a solitary measure 



18 

incapable of seriously aiding the peasants in their struggle 
with the landlords for possession of the soil. 

Meanwhile the "revolutionary democrat" Kerensky, this 
newly-fledged member of the Social-Revolutionist party, 
was brilliantly accomplishing at the front the counter- 
revolutionary task of resuming the imperialistic, predatory 
war; the task in which Gutchkov, the despised of the 
people, had utterly failed. Kerensky was intoxicated with 
his own eloquence; the imperialists who used him burned 
incense to him — he was nattered, worshipped. And all this 
for his loyal, devoted service to the capitalists— exhorting 
the "revolutionary armies" to consent to a renewal of a 
war avowedly waged in fulfillment of Tsar Nicholas' 
treaties with the capitalists of England and France— a war 
to conquer for the Russian capitalists Constantinople and 
Lemberg, Erzerum and Trcbizond. 

Thus passed the second phase of the Russian revolution, 
from May 6 to June 9. The counter-revolutionary bour- 
geoisie, having strengthened its position and fortified itself 
under cover and protection of the " Socialist" ministers, 
was preparing an onslaught upon both the external and the 
internal enemy— the revolutionary workmen. 

VII, 

On June 9 the party of the revolutionary workers, the 
Bolsheviks, arranged for a demonstration in Petrograd to 
give articulate expression to the ever-growing dissatisfac- 
tion and indignation of the masses. The leaders of the 
Essers and Mensheviks, entangled in their alliances with 
the bourgeoisie, bound hand, and foot by their imperial- 
istic war policy, became alarmed, feeling that they were 
losing their hold upon the masses. A general outcry wax 
raised against this demonstration — an outcry in which the 
Essers and Mensheviks joined the counter-revolutionary. 
Cadets. Under the guidance of the Essers and Mensheviks, 
as a result of their policy of alliance with the capitalists, 
the tendency of the petty bourgeoisie to unite with the 
grand counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie defined itself with 
amazing clearness. In this very fact is contained the his- 



i 



i 



19 

toric significance, the profound class-meaning of the crisis 
of July 9. 

The Bolsheviks, unwilling to lead the workmen into 
a desperate battle against the united Cadets, Essers and 
Mensheviks, decided to give up the demonstration. But 
the Essers and Mensheviks, hoping to retain at least a little 
of their waning influence among the masses, felt impelled 
to order a general demonstration for June 18. As for 
the bourgeoisie, it lost its wits out of sheer rage— recog- 
nizing in this move the leaning of the petty bourgeoisie 
toward the side of the proletariat— and determined to 
paralyze the action of the democracy by a military move- 
ment on the front. 

Indeed, the 18th of June gave an awe-inspiring victory 
to the slogans of the revolutionary proletariat, the rally- 
ing cries of the Bolsheviks among the Petrograd masses; 
so on June 19th the bourgeoisie and the Bonapartist 
Kerensky announced that the military offensive at the 
front had begun on that very 18th of June ! 

This meant practically the resumption of a war of spolia- 
tion, in the interests of the capitalists, against the will of 
the great majority of the toiling masses! With this renewed 
belligerency there was connected, on the one hand, the 
tremendous growth of chauvinism and the passage of mili- 
tary — and consequently of political power into the hands of 
a gang of Bonapartists. On the other hand, the recourse 
to violent repression of the masses, persecution of the 
internationalists, abolition of the freedom of propaganda, 
arrests and wholesale shooting of those who opposed the 
war. 

If the 6th of May tied the Essers and Mensheviks to the 
triumphal chariot of the bourgeoisie by a rope, the 19th 
of June shackled them with chains, 

VIII. 

The resentment of the masses upon the renewal of the 
war of spoliation naturally grew and grew. On July :: I 
their indignation burst forth in an explosion which the 



Bolshevik's tried to mitigate, of course attempting to direct 
it into organized channels. 

The Essers and Mensheviks, as the slaves of the bour- 
geoisie fettered to their masters, consented to everything; 
to the bringing of reactionary troops to Petrograd, the 
restoration of capital punishment, the disarming of the 
workmen and of the revolutionary soldiers — to arrests, per- 
solutions, the suppression of newspapers. The power which 
the bourgeoisie, inside the Government, could not entirely 
usurp, which the Soviets refused to take, fell into the 
hands of a military clique of Bonapartists who were, of 
course, supported by the Cadets and the landlords, by 
the Black Hundreds and the Capitalists. 

Step by step downward. Once on the inclined plane of 
alliances with the bourgeoisie, the Essers and Mensheviks 
irretrievably went onward and down to the very bottom. 
On February 28th, in the Petrograd Soviet, they had 
promised the Provisional Government only conditional sup- 
port. On May 6 they saved it from collapse, and allowed 
themselves to become its hirelings and defenders, unreserv- 
edly countenancing an aggressive campaign on the front. 
On June 9th they united with the counter-revolutionary 
bourgeoisie in a campaign of falsehood and calumny against 
the revolutionary proletariat. On June 19 they approved 
the renewal of the predatory war. July 3 they assented 
to the calling in of the reactionary regiments — the begin- 
ning of the final and complete surrender of the power to 
the Bonapartists. Step by step downward. 

The disgusting fate of these parties, the Essers and Men- 
sheviks, is by no moans an accident; European experience 
has many times proven it to be the outcome of the eco- 
nomic situation of the small property holders — the petty 
bourgeoisie. 

IX. 

It is a matter of common observation how the small 
proprietor uses all his energies to get into the society 
of the wealthy, to reach the rank of "captain of industry," 
to become one of the "400," to enter the plane of the 



i 






bourgeoisie. So long as capitalism reigns supreme, the 
petty property holder will be confronted with two alter- 
natives: either to succeed in climbing to the heights of 
the capitalist class (at best possible for one per cent) 
or to remain for a while struggling in the position of a 
ruined little "boss," a semi-proletarian, and to land at 
last with a crash in the ranks of the proletariat. It is 
likewise in politics. The petty bourgeois democracy, espe- 
cially in the persons of its leaders, clings to the skirts of 
the bourgeoisie. These leaders console their followers with 
promises and assurances of the plausibility of alliance 
with the grand bourgeoisie. For a short time at best they 
are favored by the capitalists with some tid-bits of con- 
cession to the few top layers of the toiling masses ; but in 
everything decisive, in every matter of importance, the 
petty— bourgeoisie—democracy remains floating in the 
penumbra of the bourgeoisie, an impotent appendage, an 
obedient tool in the hands of the financial magnates. The 
experience of England and France has often proven this. 

During the Russian revolution, when under the pressure 
of the imperialistic war and the momentous crisis created 
by it, events unfolded with extraordinary swiftness, the 
period of February-July, 1917, has fully corroborated the 
old Marxist theory regarding the instability of the position 
occupied by the petty bourgeoisie. 

The ultimate lesson of the Russian revolution: There 
is no salvation for the toiling masses in the iron jaws 
of war, of famine, of enslavement by landlords and capital- 
ists except in complete rupture with the parties of the 
Essers and Mensheviks, in the clear realization of their 
treacherous role, in the renunciation of any and all 
alliances with the bourgeoisie, in decisive union with the 
revolutionary workers. Supported by the poorest peasants, 
only the revolutionary workers can overcome the resistance 
of the capitalists, lead the nation to the winning of the 
soil without compensation, to complete liberty, victory over 
starvation, victory over the war, a just and secure peace. 

N. Lenin. 



PSHHH 



AFTERWARD 

This article, as can be seen from the text, was written 
in July. The history of the August revolution has fully 
borne out the contentions stated above. Moreover, the 
Kornilov uprising, toward the end of August, has created 
a new turning point in the revolution, unmistakably prov- 
ing to the people that the Cadets, in union with the counter- 
revolutionary generals, seek to rout the Soviets and restore 
the monarchy. How strong this new turn of the revolu- 
tion is, and how successful it will be in putting an end to 
alliances with the bourgeoisie, are questions for the near 
future to decide. 



N. Lenin. 



Sept. 6, 1917. 



ONE OF THE RADICAL QUESTIONS 
OF THE REVOLUTION 

The most **^^f ^SS^^^ 

that of the governing P ^^. 1 ^ power. Now if the 
the question of what class olds ^W™^ (Essers ), 

organ of the leading go ^™™°J e P ^ p J»)' recently corn- 
the Dielo Naroda ("Cause of the ^lec pio J, ^ 

plained (No. 147) * at ^?„S A^bl? are forgotten, 
tions of bread and the °^^ e ^ B f a ^ n ^ rB elveB- It is 
the Essers may be iniwj Blame yo u . g ^ 

the hesitancy, ^jriadM x 

the country w lt h lt .'' bc neith 

The question o£ the B™™™g t this fundamental 
obviated nor dismissed fo i t is prttni ^^ 

question which determine J« jS. It certainly 

tion, both m its «fgJ^* , SSSS has lost in vain 
cannot be disputed that our rcvon r 

half a year squabbling over the estebhshmen i^ ^ 
but this £ due to the va C e flg, .policy £ e 

Menshcvika. And tins P uu ^ , th . octty bourgeoisie, 

an Th :t-tion now ^^-^J^iirjnft 
democracy has learned a tagHT "ring this *■ 

year, so ^^o B f aSdSy ^ victorious uprising of 
the revolution is lost, ana oiuy imperative to 

the proletariat can save it. It so, tnen 



24 

begin at once the construction of a stable, unfaltering 
power. Now, during a popular revolution— a revolution 
that has aroused the masses, the majority of the workmen 
and peasants— only that power can be stable which avow- 
edly and unconditionally rests upon the majority of the 
population. Hitherto the governing power in Russia has 
been de facto in the hands of the bourgeoisie, which is 
forced now and then to make partial concessions (only to 
withdraw them at the first opportunity), to dish out prom- 
ises (only to cheat the people with the complexion of an 
"honest'*' coalition), etc. In word— a popular, democratic, 
revolutionary government; in deed— an antipopular, anti- 
democratic, counter-revolutionary, bourgeois government. 
This is the fatal contradiction that has heretofore been 
the source of the instability and fluctuation of power, of the 
"ministerial leap-frog" so sedulously played by the Essers 
and Mensheviks to the detriment of the people. 

Either rout the Soviets, let them die an ignominious 
death, or give all power to the Soviets— this I proclaimed 
before the All-Kussian Congress of Soviets in June, 1917; 
and the history of July and August has ineontrovertibly 
borne out the correctness of that utterance. The power to 
the Soviets— this power alone can claim stability, inasmuch 
as it truly rests upon the majority of the population, in 
spite of ail the lies spread broadcast by the lackeys of the 
bourgeoisie, such as Potressov, Plekhanov, etc., who call it 
"widening the base" of the government when the power is 
actually surrendered to an insignificant minority of the 
people — the bourgeoisie and the exploiters. 

Only the Soviet power could be firm, the only power 
which it would be impossible to overthrow, even in stormiest 
moments of the most tempestuous revolution; only such 
power could ensure the steady, ever-spreading development 
of the revolution, the peaceable struggle of the parties 
within the Soviets. So long as such a power is lacking, 
the inevitable eonsequ cures will be irresolution, instability. 
vaccillation, endless "crises of power," the futile comedy 
of "ministerial leap-frog," and outbursts from both left 
and right. 






25 

But the slogan, "All Power to the Soviets," is fre- 
quently, if not almost always, interpreted very incorrectly 
to mean: a ministry recruited from the parties of the 
Soviet majority. We shall consider at length this highly- 
mistaken notion. 

A ministry of the Soviet majority would mean only a 
personal change in the composition of the ministry, leav- 
ing intact the entire old apparatus of the governing power, 
an apparatus thoroughly bureaucratic, incapable of carry- 
ing out any serious reforms, not even those found in the 
platforms of the Essers and the Mensheviks. 

"All Power to the Soviets" means the thorough recon- 
struction of the old State' apparatus, the apparatus of 
antiquated officialdom which thwarts everything demo- 
cratic; it means the removal of this apparatus and the 
substitution of a new, popular, really democratic apparatus 
of the Soviets ; that is today, the organized and fully armed 
majority of the people — workers, soldiers and peasants. And 
finally, it means full independence for the majority of the 
nation, not only in choosing delegates, but also in admin- 
istering the State, and carrying out all necessary reforms. 

In order to make the contrast more clear-cut and definite, 
we shall recall a very important confession made some time 
ago by the organ of the Government party, the Essers, 
Dielo Naroda ("Cause of the People"), "Even in the 
departments which are in the hands of the Socialist 
ministers," writes this paper at the time of the notorious 
"Coalition Ministry" — "even in these departments the 
whole administrative apparatus is antiquated, find obstructs 
work. ' ' 

That goes without saying. The history of the bourgeois- 
parliamentary and the bourgeois-constitutional countries 
shows that a change of ministers means very little, for the 
real work of administration is lodged in the hands of a 
colossal array of officials, and this army is permeated with 
the anti-democratic spirit. By thousands and millions of 
f lnvads it is connected with the landlords and the bour- 
geoisie, and dependent upon them in every way. This 
army breathes only the atmosphere of bourgeois relations 



26 



with which it is surrounded; it is congealed, shrivelled 
with age, stiff and inert • it is powerless to escape from this 
atmosphere, unable to think, feel or act otherwise than it 
has always acted. This army is imbued with admiration 
for rank, for eertain privileges of " State 7 ' service, and 
its upper strata are enslaved by stocks and bonds to 
Financial Capital, in a measure acting as its direct agents, 
the executors of its interests and influence. 

To attempt by means of this administrative apparatus 
the carrying out of such reforms as the redeemed con- 
fiscation of landed estates, the monopolizing of bread, etc., 
is a huge illusion, a deception of the people. 

'This apparatus can well serve a republican bourgeoisie, 
creating a republic in the form of a "monarchy without a 
monarch," after the fashion of the Third French Republic; 
but it is absolutely powerless to carry out reforms, not 
only ultra radical but even such as would limit the rights 
of capital, the rights of "sacred private property." Thus 
in all "coalition" ministries which include Socialists, the 
inevitable consequence is that the Socialists, however con- 
scientious and personally irreproachable, remain in reality 
a mere screen for the bourgeois government, a lightning 
rod to divert the popular indignation from the government, 
a tool by which to foil the masses. It was so with Louis 
Blanc in 1848, it has been so since then time and time 
again in England and France when Socialists participated 
in the government-, it was so too with Tchernov and Tsere- 
telli in 1917 — and so it will be as long as the capitalist order 
exists and is supported by an outworn, bourgeois, bureau- 
cratic administrative apparatus. 

The Soviets of Workmen's, Soldiers' and Peasants' Dele- 
gates are invaluable for the very reason that they repre- 
sent a new, incomparably higher, incomparably more demo- 
cratic type of administrative apparatus. The Essers and 
Mensheviks did everything possible and impossible to con- 
vert the Soviets (particularly the Petrograd Soviet, and 
the All-Russian Central Executive Committee) into mere 
talking machines busy, under the pretext of "control," 
with formulating futile resolutions and humble petitions 



27 



which the Government disregarded in the most polite and 
affable manner. But the fresh breeze of the Kornilov 
adventure, pregnant with threatening tempest, forced the 
Soviet to cast off, for a time, all that was obnoxious, and 
the initiative of the revolutionary masses loomed up as 
something majestic, powerful, invincible. 

Let those who are weak of faith learn by this historic 
example. Shame upon those who say, "We have no appa- 
ratus with which to replace the old one, which invariably 
supports the bourgeoisie;" for we have such an apparatus 
— the Soviets. Fear not the initiative and independent 
action of the masses, have confidence in the revolutionary 
organization of the masses, and in all departments of the 
State you will behold the force, the magnificence, the in- 
vincibility of the workmen and peasants, which they showed 
in their enthusiastic solidarity against the Kornilov attempt. 

Distrust of the masses, fear of their initiative, fear of 
their independence, trembling at their revolutionary energy 
instead of enthusiastically and unreservedly supporting it 
— this was the greatest sin of the Essers and Mensheviks. 
Here can be found the very root of their irresolution, their 
vacillation, their endless and endlessly fruitless attempts 
to pour new wine into the bottles of the old bureaucratic 
apparatus. 

Read the history of the democratization of the Russian 
army in the Russian revolution of 1917, the history of 
Tchernov J s ministry, the history of the "ruling" Pal- 
chinsky, the history of Pechekhonov's resignation — you 
will find at every step the most instructive substantia- 
tion of this fact. The fact that there was no complete con- 
fidence in the elected soldiers ' organizations, no full realiza- 
tion of the principle of election of officers by the soldiers 
themselves, enabled, the Kornilovs, Kaledins and counter- 
revolutionary officers to be at the head of the army. This 
^ is a fact. .And whoever does not wantonly shut his <■ 
cannot help seeing that after the Kornilov affair the Ker- 
ensky Government Left everything as it was — that in 
reality it restored Kornilov rule. The appointment of 
Alexeiev, the "pact" with the Klembovskis, Gagarins, 



Bagrattions and other Kornilov followers, the kindly treat- 
ment accorded to the Kornilovs and Kaledins— all this 
shows how Kerensky was restoring the Kornilov rule. 

Experience teaches that there is no middle course pos- 
sible. Either all the power to the Soviets and complete 
democratization of the army, or Kornilov. 

And the history of Tchernov? Wasn't the greatest en- 
thusiasm aroused among the peasants by any step, how- 
ever small, toward the real satisfaction of their needs — 
every step which attested confidence in them, and in their 
mass organizations and mass actions? But for four months 
Tchernov was compelled again and again to "bargain" 
with the Cadets and the bureaucrats, who with their ever- 
lasting protractions and underhanded tactics finally forced 
him to leave without having accomplished anything. The 
landlords and capitalists "having won the game" held 
back the Constituted Assembly and even started a series 
of repressive measures against the Land Committees. 

Experience teaches that there is no middle course pos- 
sible. Either all power to the Soviets, centrally and locally, 
all the land to the peasants at once, before the decision of 
the Constituent Assembly, or the landlords and capitalists 
will thwart everything, restore the rule of the landlords, 
arouse the resentment of the peasants, and so aggravate 
the situation as to cause a regrettably violent agrarian 
revolt. 

It is the same story with the capitalists who, with the 
aid of Palchinsky prevent any serious control over produc- 
tion, the merchants preventing monopolization of bread, 
and even Pcchekhonov's attempt to establish the principle 
of a regulated democratic bread distribution. 

In Russia now the question is not to invent new reforms, 
to undertake cherished transformations. Nothing of the 
kind. Yet that is how the question is put-- and put know- 
ingly, falsely by the capitalists, the Petressovs, the Pick- - 
hanovs who clamor against the "introduction of Socialism" 
and the ''dictatorship of the proletariat." In reality the 
situation in Russia is such that the unequalled sufferings of 









29 



the war, the unparalleled danger of imminent ruin ami 
famine, have themselves dictated the way out, have them 
selves pointed out the imperative necessity of these reforms : 
bread monopoly, control of production and distribution, the 
limitation of the issue of paper money, regular exchange of 
bread for commodities, etc. 

Measures of this kind, in this direction, are universally 
acknowledged to be inevitable. They have been begun in 
many places and in widely different ways, and everywhere 
their realization is obstinately resisted by the landlords 
and capitalists, aided by the Kerensky Government — a 
thoroughly bourgeois and Bonapartist Government — as well 
as the direct and indirect pressure of Russian and "Allied" 
finance. 

I. Prilajaiev recently wrote in the Dielo Naroda ("Cause 
of the People" — No, 147), lamenting the resignation of 
Pechekhonov, the failure of price-fixing, the collapse of the 
bread monopoly: 

"Courage and resolution — that is what all our govern- 
ments, of whatever complexion, have lacked. { * # The 
revolutionary democracy need not hesitate; it should take 
the initiative itself, and. intervene in the economic chaos. 
* # * Here if anywhere at all a firm policy and a resolute 
power are indispensable." 

Yes, what is true is certainly true! Golden words. It 
has not, however, occurred to the author that the ques- 
tion of a firm policy, of a daring spirit, of determina- 
tion, is not a question of personalities, but a question 
of the el ass that is capable of daring and decisive 
action. The only such class is the proletariat. "With the 
daring and resoluteness of power, its unflinching policy 
is nothing less than the dictatorship of the proletariat, 
including the poorest peasants. I. Prilajaiev, without being 
conscious of it, craves that very dictatorship. 
% "What would such dictatorship mean? Nothing less than 
that the resistance of the Kornilov followers would he over 
come, and the complete democratization of the army accom 
plished. Ninety-nine per cent of the army would declare 



themselves ardent adherents of this dictatorship two days 
after its realization. This dictatorship would give the 
land to the peasants and full power to the peasants' local 
committees ; how can any sane man doubt that the peasants 
would support such a dictatorship? What Pechekhonov 
only imagined ("the resistance of the capitalists is 
broken," he said before the Soviets), this dictatorship 
would convert into reality without the least harm to the 
inchoate democratic organizations for food supply, indus- 
trial control, etc.; on. the contrary, it would support and 
develop them, while removing all obstacles in their way. 
Only the dictatorship of the proletariat and the poor 
peasants is capable of breaking the resistance of the eap- 
' italists, of manifesting a truly majestic courage and reso- 
luteness of power, of securing to itself the enthusiastic, 
loyal and heroic support of the army masses and the peas- 
ant masses. 

All power to the Soviets — the sole power which can ren- 
der further evolution gradual, peaceful and tranquil, pro- 
ceeding in perfect accord with the level of consciousness 
and decision exhibited by the majority of the popular 
masses—in perfect accord with the level of their own experi- 
ence. All power to the Soviets — this means a complete sur- 
render of the administration of the country and of 
control over its economic resources to the workmen, and 
peasants, whom no one would dare to resist, and who 
would soon learn by experience, from their own practice, 
justly to distribute the bread, the land, and the necessities. 

N. Lenin. 










APPENDIX 



I. 

A country may be spoken of in terms of either its 
political or economic-industrial form. In the political 
sense countries are : Autocracies (where politically privi- 
leged classes still exist; though now there are no more abso- 
lute monarchies, and the autocracies still extant may be 
called semi-democracies) ; and Democracies (where no per- 
sonal or class privileges exist, and the individual enjoys 
perfect freedom of movement). In the economic sense all 
nations are capitalistic; that is, all necessities of life are 
produced and distributed on the basis of a politically legal- 
ized principle of private ownership in land, national re- 
sources, and factories. This system of national economics 
is such that the great accumulation of wealth produced 
by nothing but labor remains as if by magic in the hands of 
a Few. 

II. 

All revolutions known until now, though always started 
by, and in the interest of, hungry stomachs, have always 
remained in the end merely political. Autocracies were 
reduced to semi-autocracies (as in Germany, Italy, Aus- 
tria), or to democracies (France, America). Now there 
seems to have set in an era of a new sort of revolution — 
the economico-social — -and Russia seems to be leading the 
way. Study the parties and know! 

"Cadets" — Constitutional Democrats (so-called because 
of the first initials of their name). Its official 1il!< i . 
"Party of People's Freedom." This party is only political, 
Xn order to preserve economically the capitalist order, it 
is ready to make concessions right and Left — to Kornilovs 



32 



and Tchernovs. Its representatives are : Miliukov, Rod- 
zianko, 

"Essers" — Socialists, Revolutionists (also called by their 
initials) . A predominantly economic party, but originally 
one-sided, representing only the peasants, It stands for the 
abolition of private property in land only, and that by 
redemption. In its new program the redemption clause is 
abandoned in face of the' rapidly-growing power of its left 
wing, the 

"Left Essers" — "Who share the present Soviet Govern- 
ment with the 

"Bolsheviks" — The most powerful wing of the Social 
Democrats, and the revolutionary party which achieved 
the October revolution, now in control of the Government. 
This party expresses the desires of the whole toiling masses 
of the people, poor peasants as well as factory workers, 
to replace in the economico-industrial foundation the prin- 
ciple of private property and capitalism by that of national 
ownership and Socialism. The name "Bolshevik" does 
not mean "Maximalist," as commonly supposed, but 
"member of the majority;" and it is derived from the 
fact that at a former congress of the Social-Denioci*atic 
party, the delegates split into two factions, the majority, 
or bolshinstvo, favoring immediate proletarian action to 
hasten the coming of Socialism. Since 1905 the Bolsheviks 
have really been in a minority, until September, 1917, while 
the dominating faction was the 

"Menshevihs" — Or as it would be translated, "members 
of the minority;" now only too true. This party includes 
many shades: Internationalists, Social-Patriots, etc, . It 
represents the Intellectuals, which means: inasmuch as 
the great achievements of knowledge and education are 
still in the hands of the old order, tj •Intellectuals as a 
class and as the incarnation of those ' achievements are 
nearer to the Cadets than to the Bolsheviks. 

Assorted Social-Democrats — Certain "groups," with a 
small following, on the fringes of the Social-Democratic 
party, whose tactics differentiate them from the main 



branches of the party. "Edinstvo" group, headed by 
Plekhanov; the "Unified Social-Democrats," headed by 
Maxim Gorki, etc. These groups range from almost perfect 
reactionaries to Intellectual internationalists, and have 
little influence at the present time. 

Note — Just as every political party has its Right, Center 
and Left, so every faction, every group is so divided. 



III. 
Some Definitions 

Landlord (Pomiestchik). A member of a class of the 
old nobility which owned most of the land, holding the 
poor peasants almost in slavery. In the last two decades 
of greater political liberty there have sprung up two new 
types of landlord: 

"Fist" (Kulak), The name for a parvenu rich villager 
who buys up the land of the poor peasants, and keeps them 
in bondage by various financial schemes. 

Capitalist Landlord. This is the rich city manufacturer 
investing his surplus capital in land, and becoming as 
ruthless a Fist as his prototype. 

Of course these three sub-classes compose the Landlord 
Class, which in its policy goes hand in hand with the 
Cadets forming the 

(Grand) Bourgeoisie. All the classes opposed to an 
economic revolution. 

Petty Bourgeoisie. The small property-holders, bosses, 
shop-keepers, etc. They occupy the middle class stage and 
their policy is divided; the poorer ones embracing Bol- 
shevism, the richer remaining with the bourgeoisie. 

Constituent As r jly (tltchreditelnoe Sobranie). A 
representative bociy elected on the basis of universal si if 
frage, both sexes, age 20, voting secret ballot. This bodj 
is supposed to assemble January 5th, 1918 (old style), l" 
lay the foundation of a State constitution. 

(See Introduction.) 




■ 



34 



Soviet (Council). The Soviets of Workmen's, Soldiers' 
and Peasants ' Delegates are bodies elected directly by small 
units of the population, so that from 200 to 500 votes have 
one representative. 

(See Introduction.) 

C. E. G. Central Executive Committee, representing the 
United Soviets of All Russia and electing the People 's Com- 
missars — now the Provisional Government of the Russian 
Republic. The C. E. C. is the parliament of the new 
Government. 




\ 



