, t New Palestine Party 

Visit of Menachen Begin and Aims of 

Political Movement Discussed 



To the Editor or Thk Nbw York Times : 

Among- the most disturbing political 
phenomena of our time is the emer- 
gence in the newly created state of 
Israel of the "Freedom Party" (Tnuat 
Haherut), a political party closely akin 
in its organization, methods, political 
philosophy and social appeal to the 
Nazi and Fascist parties. It was 
formed out of the membership and fc*' 
lowing of "the former Irgun Zvai Leumi, 
a terrorist, right-wing,«£hauvinifit or- 
ganization In Palestine. 

The current visit of Menachen Begin, 
■leader of this .party, to the United 
States is obviously calculated to give 
the impression of American support 
for his party in the coming Israeli 
elections, and to cement political ties 
with conservative Zionist elements in 
the United States. Several Americans 
of national repute have lent their 
names to welcome; his visit It is incon- 
ceivable that those who oppose fascism 
throughout tha world," if correctly in- 
formed as Id Mr. Begin's political 
record and perspectives, could add 
their names and support to tne move- 
ment he represents. -< 

Before irreparable damage is done 
by way of financial contributions, pub- 
lic ntanifestations in Begin's behalf, 
and the creation in Palestine of tha 
impression that a large • segment "of 
America supports Fascist elements in 
Israel, the American public must be 
informed as to the record and objec- 
tives of Mr. Begin and his movement. 

The public avowals of Begin's party 
are no guide whatever to its actual 
character. Today they speak of free- 
dom, democracy and anti-imperialism, 
whereas until recently they openly 
preached the doctrine of the Fascist 
state. It is in its actions that the ter- 
rorist party betrays its real character; 
from its past actions we can judge 
what it may be expected to do in the 
future. 



Attack oa Arab Village 

A shocking example was their be- 
havior in the Arab village of Deir 
Yassin. This village, off the main roads 
and surrounded by Jewish lands, had 
taken no part in the war, and had even 
fought off Arab bands who wanted to 
use the village as thoir base. On April 9 
(The New York Times), terrorist 
bands attacked this peaceful village, 
which was not a military objective in 
the fighting, killed most of its inhabi- 
tants — 240 men, women and children— 
and kept a few of them alive to parade 
as captives through the streets of 
Jerusalem. Most of the Jewish com- 
munity was horrified at the deed, and 
ike Jewish Agency sent a telegram of 
apology to King Abdullah of Trans- 
Jordan. But the terrorists, far from 
being ashamed of their act, were proud 
of this massacre', publicized it widely, 
and invited all the foreign correspond- 
ents present in the country to view the 
heaped corpses and the general havoc 
at Dein Yassin. 

The Deir Yassin incident exemplifies 
the character and actions of the Free- 
dom Party. 

Within the Jewish community they 
have preached an admixture of ultra- 
nationalism, religious mysticism, and 
racial superiority. Like other Fascist 
parties they have been used to break 
strikes, and have themselves pressed 
for the destruction of free trade unions. 
In their stead they have proposed cor- 
porate unions on the Italian Fascist 
model. 

During the last years of sporadic 
anti-British violence, the IZL and Stern 
groups inaugurated a reign of terror 
in the Palestine Jewish community. 
Teachers were beaten up for speaking 
against them, adults were shot for not 
letting their children join them. By 
gangster methods, beatings, window- 
smashing, and wide-spread robberies, 
the terrorists intimidated the popula- 
tion and exacted a heavy tribute. 

The people of the Freedom Party 
have had no part in the constructive 
achievements in Palestine. They have 
reclaimed no land, built no settlements, 
and only detracted from the Jewish 
defense activity. Their much-publicized 
immigration endeavors were minute, 
and devoted mainly to bringing in 
Fascist compatriots. 



Discrepancies Seen 

The discrepancies between the bold 
claims now being made by Begin and 
his party, and their record of past per- 
formance In Palestine bear the imprint 
of no ordinary political party. This is 
the unmistakable stamp of a Fascist 
party for whom terrorism (against 
Jews, Arabs, and British alike), and 
misrepresentation are means, and a 
"Leader State" is the goal. 

In the light of the forefeoing consid- 
erations, it is imperative that the truth 
about Mr. Begin and his movement be- 
made known in this country. It la all 
the more tragic that the top leadership 
of American Zionism has refused to 
campaign against Begin's efforts, 01 
even to expose to its own constituents 
the dangers to Israel from support ft) 
Begin. 

The undersigned therefore take thi* 

means of publicly, presenting a few 
salient facts concerning Begin and hit 
party; and of urging all concerned not 
to support this latest manifestation ot 
fascism. - 

Isidore abeamowitz, Hannah abendt, 

abraham brick, rabbi je8b urun 

CARDOZO, {ALBERT ElNSTEml HER- 
MAN ElSEN, AL D., HAY1M FINE- 

man, M. Gallen, M. D., H. H. Har- 
ris, Zeuo S. Harris, Sidney Hook, 

fred karush, bruria kaufman, 
irma l. undheim, nachmak 
Majsel, Seymour Melman, Myeb 
d. mendelson, m. d., harry |£ 
Orunsky, Samuei> Fitlick, frits 
rohruch, louis p. rocker, ruth 
sageb, itzhak sank0w8ky, 1. j. , 

, SCHOENBEBQ, SAMUH*.SHUMAN, M. 

..Zngbb, irma Wolfe, stkfajt 

New,Toric.r)eo.^ija8 rV ;\ * * 



