On Sense and Reference 



Equality 111 gives rise to challenging questions which are 
not altogether easy to answer. Is it a relation? A rela- 
tion between objects, or between names or signs of ob- 
jects? In my Begriffsschrift I assumed the latter. The 
reasons which seem to favour this are the following: a = 
a and a = b are obviously statements of differing cogni- 
tive value; a = a holds a priori and, according to Kant, is 
to be labeled analytic, while statements of the form a = b 
often contain very valuable extensions of our knowledge 
and cannot always be established a priori. The discovery 
that the rising sun is not new every morning, but always 
the same, was one of the most fertile astronomical dis- 
coveries. Even today the identification of a small planet 
or a comet is not always a matter of course. Now if we 
were to regard equality as a relation between that which 
the names 'a' and 'b' designate, it would seem that a = b 
could not differ from a = a (i.e. provided a = b is true). 
A relation would thereby be expressed of a thing to itself, 
and indeed one in which each thing stands to itself but 
to no other thing. What is intended to be said by a = b 
seems to be that the signs or names 'a' and 'b' designate 
the same thing, so that those signs themselves would be 
under discussion; a relation between them would be as- 
serted. But this relation would hold between the names 
or signs only in so far as they named or designated some- 
thing. It would be mediated by the connexion of each of 
the two signs with the same designated thing. But this is 
arbitrary. Nobody can be forbidden to use any arbitrar- 
ily producible event or object as a sign for something. In 
that case the sentence a = b would no longer refer to the 
subject matter, but only to its mode of designation; we 
would express no proper knowledge by its means. But in 
many cases this is just what we want to do. If the sign 'a' 
is distinguished from the sign 'b' only as object (here, by 
means of its shape), not as sign (i.e. not by the manner in 
which it designates something), the cognitive value of a = 
a becomes essentially equal to that of a = b, provided a = 
b is true. A difference can arise only if the difference be- 
tween the signs corresponds to a difference in the mode 
of presentation of that which is designated. Let a, b, c 
be the lines connecting the vertices of a triangle with the 
midpoints of the opposite sides. The point of intersection 
of a and b is then the same as the point of intersection of 
b and c. So we have different designations for the same 
point, and these names ('point of intersection of a and 
b\ 'point of intersection of b and c') likewise indicate the 
mode of presentation; and hence the statement contains 
actual knowledge. 

It is natural, now, to think of there being connected with 
a sign (name, combination of words, letter), besides that 



to which the sign refers, which may be called the refer- 
ence of the sign, also what I should like to call the sense of 
the sign, wherein the mode of presentation is contained. 
In our example, accordingly, the reference of the expres- 
sions 'point of intersection of a and b' and 'point of inter- 
section of b and c' would be the same, but not their senses. 
The reference of 'evening star' would be the same as that 
of 'morning star', but not the sense. 

It is clear from the context that by 'sign' and 'name' I have 
here understood any designation representing a proper 
name, which thus has as its reference a definite object 
(this word taken in the widest range), but not a concept 
or a relation, which shall be discussed further in another 
article. The designation of a single object can also con- 
sist of several words or other signs. For brevity, let every 
such designation be called a proper name. 

The sense of a proper name is grasped by everybody who 
is sufficiently familiar with the language or totality of des- 
ignations to which it belongs; 121 but this serves to illumi- 
nate only a single aspect of the reference, supposing it 
to have one. Comprehensive knowledge of the reference 
would require us to say immediately whether any given 
sense belongs to it. To such knowledge we never attain. 

The regular connexion between a sign, its sense, and its 
reference is of such a kind that to the sign there corre- 
sponds a definite sense and to that in turn a definite ref- 
erence, while to a given reference (an object) there does 
not belong only a single sign. The same sense has differ- 
ent expression in different languages or even in the same 
language. To be sure, exceptions to this regular behaviour 
occur. To every expression belonging to a complete to- 
tality of signs, there should certainly correspond a defi- 
nite sense; but natural languages often do not satisfy this 
condition, and one must be content if the same word has 
the same sense in the same context. It may perhaps be 
granted that every grammatically well-formed expression 
representing a proper name always has a sense. But this is 
not to say that to the sense there also corresponds a refer- 
ence. The words 'the celestial body most distant from the 
Earth' have a sense, but it is very doubtful if they also have 
a reference. The expression 'the least rapidly convergent 
series' has a sense; but it is known to have no reference, 
since for every given convergent series, another conver- 
gent, but less rapidly convergent, series can be found. In 
grasping a sense, one is not certainly assured of a refer- 
ence. 

If words are used in the ordinary way, what one intends to 
speak of is their reference. It can also happen, however, 



1 



2 



that one wishes to talk about the words themselves or their 
sense. This happens, for instance, when the words of an- 
other are quoted. One's own words then first designate 
words of the other speaker, and only the latter have their 
usual reference. We then have signs of signs. In writing, 
the words are in this case enclosed in quotation marks. 
Accordingly, a words standing between quotation marks 
must not be taken as having its ordinary reference. 

In order to speak of the sense of an expression 'A' one may 
simply use the phrase 'the sense of the expression "A"'. 
In reported speech one talks about the sense, e.g., of an- 
other person's remarks. It is quite clear that in this way of 
speaking words do not have their customary reference but 
designate what is usually their sense. In order to have a 
short expression, we will say: In reported speech, words 
are used indirectly or have their indirect reference. We 
distinguish accordingly the customary from the indirect 
reference of a word; and its customary from its indirect 
sense. The indirect reference of a word is accordingly its 
customary sense. Such exceptions must always be borne 
in mind if the mode of connexion between sign, sense, 
and reference in particular cases is to be correctly under- 
stood. 

The reference and sense of a sign are to be distinguished 
from the associated idea. If the reference of a sign is an 
object perceivable by the senses, my idea of it is an inter- 
nal image, 131 arising from memories of sense impressions 
which I have had and acts, both internal and external, 
which I have performed. Such an idea is often saturated 
with feeling; the clarity of its separate parts varies and 
oscillates. The same sense is not always connected, even 
in the same man, with the same idea. The idea is subjec- 
tive: one man's idea is not that of another. There result, 
as a matter of course, a variety of differences in the ideas 
associated with the same sense. A painter, a horseman, 
and a zoologist will probably connect different ideas with 
the name 'Bucephalus'. This constitutes an essential dis- 
tinction between the idea and the sign's sense, which may 
be common property of many and therefore not a part of 
a mode of the individual mind. For one can hardly deny 
that mankind has a common store of thoughts which is 
transmitted from one generation to another. [4] 

In light of this, one need have no scruples in speaking of 
the sense, whereas in the case of an idea one must, strictly 
speaking, add to whom it belongs and at what time. It 
might perhaps be said: Just as one man connects this idea, 
and another that idea, with the same word, so also one 
man can associate this sense and another that sense. But 
there still remains a difference in the mode of connexion. 
They are not prevented from grasping the same sense; but 
they cannot have the same idea. Si duo idem faciunt, non 
est idem. If two persons picture the same thing, each still 
has his own idea. It is indeed sometimes possible to es- 
tablish differences in the ideas, or even in the sensations, 
of different men; but an exact comparison is not possible, 
because we cannot have both ideas together in the same 
consciousness. 



The reference of a proper name is the object itself which 
we designate by its means; the idea, which we have in 
that case, is wholly subjective; in between lies the sense, 
which is indeed no longer subjective like the idea, but is 
yet not the object itself. The following analogy will per- 
haps clarify these relationships. Somebody observes the 
Moon through a telescope. I compare the Moon itself 
to the reference; it is the object of the observation, medi- 
ated by the real image projected by the object glass in the 
interior of the telescope, and by the retinal image of the 
observer. The former I compare to the sense, the latter is 
like the idea or experience. The optical image in the tele- 
scope is indeed one-sided and dependent upon the stand- 
point of observation; but it is still objective, inasmuch as 
it can be used by several observers. At any rate it could 
be arranged for several to use it simultaneously. But each 
one would have his own retinal image. On account of the 
diverse shapes of the observers' eyes, even a geometrical 
congruence could hardly be achieved, and an actual coin- 
cidence would be out of the question. This analogy might 
be developed still further, by assuming A's retinal image 
made visible to B; or A might also see his own retinal im- 
age in a mirror. In this way we might perhaps show how 
an idea can itself be taken as an object, but as such is not 
for the observer what it directly is for the person having 
the idea. But to pursue this would take us too far afield. 

We can now recognize three levels of difference between 
words, expressions, or whole sentences. The difference 
may concern at most the ideas, or the sense but not the 
reference, or, finally, the reference as well. With respect 
to the first level, it is to be noted that, on account of the un- 
certain connexion of ideas with words, a difference may 
hold for one person, which another does not find. The dif- 
ference between a translation and the original text should 
properly not overstep the first level. To the possible dif- 
ferences here belong also the colouring and shading which 
poetic eloquence seeks to give to the sense. Such colour- 
ing and shading are not objective, and must be evoked by 
each hearer or reader according to the hints of the poet 
or the speaker. Without some affinity in human ideas art 
would certainly be impossible; but it can never be exactly 
determined how far the intentions of the poet are realized. 

In what follows, there will be no further discussion of 
ideas and experiences; they have been mentioned here 
only to ensure that the idea aroused in the hearer by a 
word shall not be confused with its sense or its reference. 

To make short and exact expressions possible, let the fol- 
lowing phraseology be established: 

A proper name (word, 
sign, sign combination, 
expression) expresses its 
sense, stands for or des- 
ignates its reference. By 
means of a sign we ex- 
press its sense and desig- 
nate its reference. 



3 



Idealists or skeptics will perhaps long since have objected: 
"You talk, without further ado, of the Moon as an object; 
but how do you know that the name 'the Moon' has any 
reference? How do you know that anything whatsoever 
has a reference?" I reply that when we say 'the Moon,' 
we do not intend to speak of our idea of the Moon, nor 
are we satisfied with the sense alone, but we presuppose 
a reference. To assume that in the sentence 'The Moon is 
smaller than the Earth' the idea of the Moon is in question, 
would be flatly to misunderstand the sense. If this is what 
the speaker wanted, he would use the phrase 'my idea of 
the Moon'. Now we can of course be mistaken in the 
presupposition, and such mistakes have indeed occurred. 
But the question whether the presupposition is perhaps 
always mistaken need not be answered here; in order to 
justify mention of reference of a sign it is enough, at first, 
to point out our intention in speaking or thinking. (We 
must then add the reservation: provided such reference 
exists.) 

So far we have considered the sense and reference only of 
such expressions, words, or signs as we have called proper 
names. We now inquire concerning the sense and refer- 
ence for an entire declarative sentence. Such a sentence 
contains a thought. 151 Is this thought, now, to be regarded 
as its sense or its reference? Let us assume for the time 
being that the sentence has a reference. If we now replace 
one word of the sentence by another having the same ref- 
erence, but a different sense, this can have no bearing 
upon the reference of the sentence. Yet we can see that 
in such a case the thought changes; since, e.g., the thought 
in the sentence 'The morning star is a body illuminated by 
the Sun' differs from that in the sentence 'The evening star 
is a body illuminated by the Sun.' Anybody who did not 
know that the evening star is the morning star might hold 
the one thought to be true, the other false. The thought, 
accordingly, cannot be the reference of the sentence, but 
must rather be considered as the sense. What is the po- 
sition now with regard to the reference? Have we a right 
even to inquire about it? Is it possible that a sentence 
as a whole has only a sense, but no reference? At any 
rate, one might expect that such sentences occur, just as 
there are parts of sentences having a sense but no refer- 
ence. And sentences which contain proper names without 
reference will be of this kind. The sentence 'Odysseus 
was set ashore at Ithaca while sound asleep' obviously 
has a sense. But since it is doubtful whether the name 
'Odysseus', occurring therein, has a reference, it is also 
doubtful whether the whole sentence has one. Yet it is 
certain, nevertheless, that anyone who seriously took the 
sentence to be true or false would ascribe to the name 
'Odysseus' a reference, not merely a sense; for it is of the 
reference of the name that the predicate is affirmed or 
denied. Whoever does not admit the name has a refer- 
ence can neither apply nor withhold the predicate. But in 
that case it would be superfluous to advance to the refer- 
ence of the name; one could be satisfied with the sense, if 
one wanted to go no further than the thought. If it were 
a question only of the sense of the sentence, the thought, 



it would be unnecessary to bother with the reference of 
a part of the sentence; only the sense, not the reference, 
of the part is relevant to the sense of the whole sentence. 
The thought remains the same whether 'Odysseus' has a 
reference or not. The fact that we concern ourselves at 
all about the reference of a part of the sentence indicates 
that we generally recognize and expect a reference for the 
sentence itself. The thought loses value for us as soon as 
we recognize that the reference of one of its parts is miss- 
ing. We are therefore justified in not being satisfied with 
the sense of a sentence, and in inquiring also as to its ref- 
erence. But now why do we want every proper name to 
have not only a sense, but also a reference? Why is the 
thought not enough for us? Because, and to the extent 
that, we are concerned with its truth value. This is not 
always the case. In hearing an epic poem, for instance, 
apart from the euphony of the language we are interested 
only in the sense of the sentences and the images and feel- 
ings thereby aroused. The question of truth would cause 
us to abandon aesthetic delight for an attitude of scien- 
tific investigation. Hence it is a matter of no concern to 
us whether the name 'Odysseus', for instance, has refer- 
ence, so long as we accept the poem as a work of art. 161 
It is the striving for truth that drives us always to advance 
from the sense to the reference. 

We have seen that the reference of a sentence may always 
be sought, whenever the reference of its components is 
involved; and that this is the case when and only when we 
are inquiring after the truth value. 

We are therefore driven into accepting the truth value of a 
sentence as constituting its reference. By the truth value 
of a sentence I understand the circumstance that it is true 
or false. There are no further truth values. For brevity I 
call the one the True, the other the False. Every declara- 
tive sentence concerned with the reference of its words is 
therefore to be regarded as a proper name, and its refer- 
ence, if it has one, is either the True or the False. These 
two objects are recognized, if only implicitly, by every- 
body who judges something to be true— and so even by 
a sceptic. The designation of the truth values as objects 
may appear to be an arbitrary fancy or perhaps a mere 
play upon words, from which no profound consequences 
could be drawn. What I mean by an object can be more 
exactly discussed only in connexion with concept and re- 
lation. I will reserve this for another article. But so much 
should already be clear, that in every judgment, 171 no mat- 
ter how trivial, the step from the level of thoughts to the 
level of reference (the objective) has already been taken. 

One might be tempted to regard the relation of the 
thought to the True not as that of sense to reference, 
but rather as that of subject to predicate. One can, in- 
deed, say: 'The thought, that 5 is a prime number, is true.' 
But closer examination shows that nothing more has been 
said than in the simple sentence '5 is a prime number.' 
The truth claim arises in each case from the form of the 
declarative sentence, and when the latter lacks its usual 
force, e.g., in the mouth of an actor upon the stage, even 



4 



the sentence 'The thought that 5 is a prime number is true' 
contains only a thought, and indeed the same thought as 
the simple '5 is a prime number. ' It follows that the re- 
lation of the thought to the True may not be compared 
with that of a subject to predicate. Subject and predi- 
cate (understood in the logical sense) are indeed elements 
of thought; they stand on the same level for knowledge. 
But combining subject and predicate, one reaches only a 
thought, never passes from sense to reference, never from 
a thought to its truth value. One moves at the same level 
but never advances from one level to the next. A truth 
value cannot be a part of a thought, any more than, say, 
the Sun can, for it is not a sense but an object. 

If our supposition that the reference of a sentence is its 
truth value is correct, the latter must remain unchanged 
when a part of the sentence is replaced by an expression 
having the same reference. And this is in fact the case. 
Leibniz gives the definition: 'Eadem sunt, quae sibi mu- 
tuo substitui possunt, salva veritate.' What else but the 
truth value could be found, that belongs quite generally 
to every sentence if the reference of its components is 
relevant, and remains unchanged by substitutions of the 
kind in question? 

If now the truth value of a sentence is its reference, then 
on the one hand all true sentences have the same refer- 
ence, and so, on the other hand, do all false sentences. 
From this we see that in the reference of the sentence all 
that is specific is obliterated. We can never be concerned 
only with the reference of a sentence; but again the mere 
thought alone yields no knowledge, but only the thought 
together with its reference, i.e. its truth value. Judgments 
can be regarded as advances from a thought to a truth 
value. Naturally this cannot be a definition. Judgment is 
something quite peculiar and incomparable. One might 
also say that judgments are distinctions of parts within 
truth values. Such distinction occurs by a return to the 
thought. To every sense belonging to a truth value there 
would correspond its own manner of analysis. However, 
I have here used the word 'part' in a special sense. I have 
in fact transferred the relation between the parts and the 
whole of the sentence to its reference, by calling the ref- 
erence of a word part of the reference of the sentence, if 
the word itself is part of the sentence. This way of speak- 
ing can certainly be attacked, because the whole refer- 
ence and one part of it do not suffice to determine the 
remainder, and because the word 'part' is already used in 
another sense of bodies. A special term would need to be 
invented. 

The supposition that the truth value of a sentence is its 
reference shall now be put to further test. We have found 
that the truth value of a sentence remains unchanged 
when an expression is replaced by another having the 
same reference: but we have not yet considered the case 
in which the expression to be replaced is itself a sen- 
tence. Now if our view is correct, the truth value of a sen- 
tence containing another as part must remain unchanged 
when the part is replaced by another sentence having the 



same truth value. Exceptions are to be expected when the 
whole sentence or its part is direct or indirect quotation; 
for in such cases, as we have seen, the words do not have 
their customary reference. In direct quotation, a sentence 
designates another sentence, and in indirect quotation a 
thought. 

We are thus led to consider subordinate sentences or 
clauses. These occur as parts of a sentence complex, 
which is, from the logical standpoint, likewise a sentence- 
-a main sentence. But here we meet the question whether 
it is also true of the subordinate sentence that its reference 
is a truth value. Of indirect quotation we already know 
the opposite. Grammarians view subordinate clauses as 
representatives of parts of sentences and divide them ac- 
cordingly into noun clauses, adjective clauses, adverbial 
clauses. This might generate the supposition that the ref- 
erence of a subordinate clause was not a truth value but 
rather of the same kind as the reference of a noun or ad- 
jective or adverb— in short, of a part of a thought. Only 
a more thorough investigation can clarify the issue. In 
so doing, we shall not follow the grammatical categories 
strictly, but rather group together what is logically of the 
same kind. Let us first search for cases in which the sense 
of the subordinate clause, as we have just supposed, is not 
an independent thought. 

The case of an abstract noun clause, introduced by 'that', 
includes the case of indirect quotation, in which we have 
seen the words to have their indirect reference coinciding 
with what is customarily their sense. In this case, then, 
the subordinate clause has for its reference a thought, not 
a truth value; as sense not a thought, but the sense of 
the words 'the thought, that ...,' which is only a part of 
the thought in the entire complex sentence. This hap- 
pens after 'say', 'hear', 'be of the opinion', 'be convinced', 
'conclude', and similar words. 181 There is a different, and 
indeed somewhat complicated, situation after words like 
'perceive', 'know', 'fancy', which are to be considered 
later. 

That in the cases of the first kind the reference of the 
subordinate clause is in fact the thought can also be rec- 
ognized by seeing that it is indifferent to the truth of the 
whole whether the subordinate clause is true or false. Let 
us compare, for instance, the two sentences 'Copernicus 
believed that the planetary orbits are circles' and 'Coper- 
nicus believed that the apparent motion of the Sun is pro- 
duced by the real motion of the Earth.' One subordinate 
clause can be substituted for the other without harm to 
the truth. The main clause and the subordinate clause to- 
gether have as their sense only a single thought, and the 
truth of the whole includes neither the truth nor the un- 
truth of the subordinate clause. In such cases it is not 
permissible to replace one expression in the subordinate 
clause by another having the same customary reference, 
but only by one having the same indirect reference, i.e. 
the same customary sense. If somebody were to con- 
clude: The reference of a sentence is not its truth value, 
for in that case it could always be replaced by another sen- 



5 



tence of the same truth value; he would prove too much; 
one might just as well claim that the reference of 'morning 
star' is not Venus, since one may not always say 'Venus' 
in place of 'morning star'. One has the right to conclude 
only that the reference of a sentence is not always its truth 
value, and that 'morning star' does not always stand for the 
planet Venus, viz. when the word has its indirect refer- 
ence. An exception of such a kind occurs in the subor- 
dinate clause just considered which has a thought as its 
reference. 

If one says 'It seems that ...' one means 'It seems to me 
that ..." or 'I think that ...' We therefore have the same 
case again. The situation is similar in the case of expres- 
sions such as 'to be pleased, 'to regret', 'to approve', 'to 
blame', 'to hope', 'to fear'. If, toward the end of the battle 
of Waterloo, Wellington was glad that the Prussians were 
coming, the cause for his joy was a conviction. Had he 
been deceived, he would have been no less pleased so long 
as his illusion lasted; and before he became convinced of 
it he could not have been pleased that the Prussians were 
coming-even though in fact they might have been already 
approaching. Just as a conviction or a belief is the ground 
of a feeling, it can, as an inference, also be the ground of 
a conviction. In the sentence: 'Columbus inferred from 
the roundness of the Earth that he could reach India by 
traveling towards the west,' we have as the reference of 
the parts two thoughts, that the Earth is round, and that 
Columbus by traveling to the west could reach India. All 
that is relevant here is that Columbus was convinced of 
both, and that the one conviction was a ground for the 
other. Whether the Earth is really round, and whether 
Columbus could really reach India by traveling west, are 
immaterial to the truth of our sentence; but it is not imma- 
terial whether we replace 'the Earth' by 'the planet which 
is accompanied by a moon whose diameter is greater than 
the fourth part of its own.' Here also we have the indirect 
reference of words. 

Adverbial final clauses beginning 'in order that' also be- 
long here; for obviously the purpose is a thought; there- 
fore: indirect reference for the words, subjunctive mood. 

A subordinate clause with 'that' after 'command', 'ask', 
'forbid', would appear in direct speech as an imperative. 
Such a clause has not reference but only a sense. A com- 
mand, a request, are indeed not thought, yet they stand on 
the same level as thought. Hence in subordinate clauses 
depending upon 'command', 'ask', etc., words have their 
indirect reference. The reference of such a clause is 
therefore not a truth value but a command, a request, and 
so forth. 

The case is similar for the dependent question in phrases 
such as 'doubt whether', 'not to know what'. It is easy 
to see that here also the words are to be taken to have 
their indirect reference. Dependent clauses expressing 
questions and beginning with 'who', 'what', 'where', 'how', 
'by what means', etc., seem at times to approximate very 
closely to adverbial clauses in which words have their cus- 



tomary references. These cases are distinguished linguis- 
tically by the mood of the verb. With the subjunctive, 
we have a dependent question and indirect reference of 
the words, so that a proper name cannot in general be re- 
placed by another name of the same object. 

In the cases so far considered the words of the subordinate 
clauses had their indirect reference, and this made it clear 
that the reference of the subordinate clause itself was in- 
direct, i.e. not a truth value but a thought, a command, a 
request, a question. The subordinate clause could be re- 
garded as a noun, indeed one could say: as a proper name 
of that thought, that command, etc., which it represented 
in the context of the sentence structure. 

We now come to other subordinate clauses, in which the 
words do have their customary reference without how- 
ever a thought occurring as sense and a truth value as ref- 
erence. How this is possible is best made clear by exam- 
ples. 

Whoever discovered the 
elliptic form of the plane- 
tary orbits died in misery. 

If the sense of the subordinate clause were here a thought, 
it would have to be possible to express it also in a separate 
sentence. But this does not work, because the grammat- 
ical subject 'whoever' has no independent sense and only 
mediates the relation with the consequent clause 'died 
in misery'. For this reason the sense of the subordinate 
clause is not a complete thought, and its reference is Ke- 
pler, not a truth value. One might object that the sense of 
the whole does contain a thought as part, viz. that there 
was somebody who first discovered the elliptic form of 
the planetary orbits; for whoever takes the whole to be 
true cannot deny this part. This is undoubtedly so; but 
only because otherwise the dependent clause 'whoever 
discovered the elliptic for of the planetary orbits' would 
have no reference. If anything is asserted there is always 
an obvious presupposition that the simple or compound 
proper names used have reference. If one therefore as- 
serts 'Kepler died in misery,' there is a presupposition that 
the name 'Kepler' designates something; but it does not 
follow that the sense of the sentence 'Kepler died in mis- 
ery' contains the thought that the name 'Kepler' designates 
something. If this were the case the negation would have 
to run not 

Kepler did not die in mis- 
ery 

But 

Kepler did not die in mis- 
ery, or the name 'Kepler' 
has no reference. 

That the name 'Kepler' designates something is just as 
much a presupposition for the assertion 



6 



Kepler died in misery 

as for the contrary assertion. Now languages have the 
fault of containing expressions which fail to designate an 
object (although their grammatical form seems to qualify 
them for that purpose) because the truth of some sen- 
tences is a prerequisite. Thus it depends on the truth of 
the sentence: 

There was someone who 
discovered the elliptic 
form of the planetary 
orbits 

Whether the subordinate clause 

Whoever discovered the 
elliptic form of the plan- 
etary orbits 

really designates an object or only seems to do so while 
having in fact no reference. And thus it may appear as 
if our subordinate clause contained as a part of its sense 
the thought that there was somebody who discovered the 
elliptic form of the planetary orbits. If this were right the 
negation would run: 

Either whoever discov- 
ered the elliptic form of 
the planetary orbits did 
not die in misery or there 
was nobody who discov- 
ered the elliptic form of 
the planetary orbits 

This arises from an imperfection of language, from which 
even the symbolic language of mathematical analysis is 
not altogether free; even there combinations of symbols 
can occur that seem to stand for something but have (at 
least so far) no reference, e.g. divergent infinite series. 
This can be avoided, e.g., by means of the special stip- 
ulation that divergent infinite series shall stand for the 
number 0. A logically perfect language (Begriffsschrift) 
should satisfy the conditions, that every expression gram- 
matically well constructed as a proper name out of signs 
already introduced shall in fact designate an object, and 
that no new sign shall be introduced as a proper name 
without being secured a reference. The logic books con- 
tain warnings against logical mistakes arising from the 
ambiguity of expressions. I regard as no less pertinent a 
warning against apparent proper names having no refer- 
ence. The history of mathematics supplies errors which 
have arisen in this way. This lends itself to demagogic 
abuse as easily as ambiguity— perhaps more easily. 'The 
will of the people' can serve as an example; for it is easy 
to establish that there is at any rate no generally accepted 
reference for this expression. It is therefore by no means 



unimportant to eliminate the source of these mistakes, at 
least in science, once and for all. Then such objections as 
the one discussed above would become impossible, be- 
cause it could never depend upon the truth of a thought 
whether a proper name had a reference. 

With the consideration of these noun clauses may be cou- 
pled that of types of adjectives and adverbial clauses 
which are logically in close relation to them. 

Adjective clauses also serve to construct compound 
proper names, though, unlike noun clauses, they are not 
sufficient by themselves for this purpose. These adjective 
clauses are to be regarded as equivalent to adjectives. In- 
stead of 'the square root of 4 which is smaller than 0', one 
can also say 'the negative square root of 4'. We have here 
the case of a compound proper name constructed from 
the expression for a concept with the help of the singu- 
lar definite article. This is at any rate permissible if the 
concept applies to one and only one single object. pl 

Expressions for concepts can be so constructed that char- 
acteristics are given by adjective clauses as, in our ex- 
ample, by the clause 'which is smaller than 0'. It is evi- 
dent that such an adjective clause cannot have a thought 
as sense or a truth value as reference, any more than the 
noun clause could. Its sense, which can also be expressed 
in many cases by a single adjective, is only a part of a 
thought. Here, as in the case of the noun clause, there 
is no independent subject and therefore no possibility of 
reproducing the sense of the subordinate clause in an in- 
dependent sentence. 

Places, instants, stretches of time, are, logically consid- 
ered, objects; hence the linguistic designation of a def- 
inite place, a definite instant, or a stretch of time is to 
be regarded as a proper name. Now adverbial clauses of 
place and time can be used for the construction of such 
a proper name in a manner similar to that which we have 
seen in the case of noun and adjective clauses. In the 
same way, expressions for concepts bringing in places, 
etc., can be constructed. It is to be noted here also that the 
sense of these subordinate clauses cannot be reproduced 
in an independent sentence, since an essential component, 
viz. the determination of place or time, is missing and is 
only indicated by a relative pronoun or a conjunction. 1101 
In conditional clauses, also, there may usually be recog- 
nized to occur an indefinite indicator, having a similar 
correlate in the dependent clause. (We have already seen 
this occur in noun, adjective, and adverbial clauses.) In 
so far as each indicator refers to the other, both clauses to- 
gether form a connected whole, which as a rule expresses 
only a single thought. In the sentence 

If a number is less than 
1 and greater than 0, its 
square is less than 1 and 
greater than 0 

the element in question is 'a number' in the conditional 
clause and 'its' in the dependent clause. It is by means 



7 



of this indefiniteness that the sense acquires the general- 
ity expected of a law. It is this which is responsible for 
the fact that the antecedent clause alone has no complete 
thought as its sense and in combination with the conse- 
quent clause expresses one and only one thought, whose 
parts are no longer thoughts. It is, in general, incorrect to 
say that in the hypothetical judgment two judgments are 
put in reciprocal relationship. If this or something similar 
is said, the word 'judgment' is used in the same sense as 
I have connected with the word 'thought', so that I would 
use the formulation: 'A hypothetical thought establishes a 
reciprocal relationship between two thoughts.' This could 
be true only if an indefinite indicator is absent; 1111 but in 
such a case there would also be no generality. 

If an instant of time is to be indefinitely indicated in both 
conditional and dependent clauses, this is often achieved 
merely by using the present tense of the verb, which 
in such a case however does not indicate the temporal 
present. This grammatical form is then the indefinite in- 
dicator in the main and subordinate clauses. An exam- 
ple of this is: 'When the Sun is in the tropic of Cancer, 
the longest day in the northern hemisphere occurs.' Here, 
also, it is impossible to express the sense of the subordi- 
nate clause in a full sentence, because this sense is not a 
complete thought. If we say: 'The Sun is in the tropic of 
Cancer,' this would refer to our present time and thereby 
change the sense. Just as little is the sense of the main 
clause a thought; only the whole, composed of main and 
subordinate clauses, has such a sense. It may be added 
that several common components in the antecedent and 
consequent clauses may be indefinitely indicated. 

It is clear that noun clauses with 'who' or 'what' and adver- 
bial clauses with 'where', 'when', 'wherever', 'whenever' 
are often to be interpreted as having the sense of condi- 
tional clauses, e.g. 'who touches pitch, defiles himself.' 

Adjective clauses can also take the place of conditional 
clauses. Thus the sense of the sentence previously used 
can be given in the form 'The square of a number which 
is less than 1 and greater than 0 is less than 1 and greater 
thanO.' 

The situation is quite different if the common component 
of the two clauses is designated by a proper name. In the 
sentence: 

Napoleon, who recog- 
nized the danger to his 
right flank, himself led 
his guards against the 
enemy position 

two thoughts are expressed: 

1. Napoleon recognized 
the danger to his right 
flank 



2. Napoleon himself led 
his guards against the en- 
emy position. 

When and where this happened is to be fixed only by the 
context, but is nevertheless to be taken as definitely de- 
termined thereby. If the entire sentence is uttered as an 
assertion, we thereby simultaneously assert both compo- 
nent sentences. If one of the parts is false, the whole is 
false. Here we have the case that the subordinate clause 
by itself has a complete thought as sense (if we complete 
it by indication of place and time). The reference of the 
subordinate clause is accordingly a truth value. We can 
therefore expect that it may be replaced, without harm 
to the truth value of the whole, by a sentence having the 
same truth value. This is indeed the case; but it is to be 
noticed that for purely grammatical reasons, its subject 
must be 'Napoleon', for only then can it be brought into 
the form of an adjective clause belonging to 'Napoleon'. 
But if the demand that it be expressed in this form be 
waived, and the connexion be shown by 'and', this restric- 
tion disappears. 

Subsidiary clauses beginning with 'although' also express 
complete thoughts. This conjunction actually has no 
sense and does not change the sense of the clause but 
only illuminates it in a peculiar fashion. 1121 We could in- 
deed replace the conditional clause without harm to the 
truth of the whole by another of the same truth value; but 
the light in which the clause is placed by the conjunction 
might then easily appear unsuitable, as if a song with a 
sad subject were to be sung in a lively fashion. 

In the last cases the truth of the whole included the truth 
of the component clauses. The case is different if a condi- 
tional clause expresses a complete thought by containing, 
in the place of an indefinite indicator, a proper name or 
something which is to be regarded as equivalent. In the 
sentence 

If the Sun has already 
risen, the sky is very 
cloudy 

the time is the present, that is to say, definite. And the 
place is also to be thought of as definite. Here it can be 
said that a relation between the truth values of conditional 
and dependent clauses has been asserted, viz. such that 
the case does not occur in which the antecedent stands for 
the True and the consequent for the False. Accordingly, 
our sentence is true if the Sun has not yet risen, whether 
the sky is very cloudy or not, and also if the Sun has risen 
and the sky is very cloudy. Since only truth values are 
here in question, each component clause can be replaced 
by another of the same truth value without changing the 
truth value of the whole. To be sure, the light in which 
the subject then appears would usually be unsuitable; the 
thought might easily seem distorted; but this has nothing 
to do with its truth value. One must always take care not 



8 



to clash with the subsidiary thoughts, which are however 
not explicitly expressed and therefore should not be reck- 
oned in the sense. Hence, also, no account need be taken 
of their truth values. 1131 

The simple cases have now been discussed. Let us review 
what we have learned. 

The subordinate clause usually has for its sense not a 
thought, but only a part of one, and consequently no truth 
value as reference. The reason for this is either that the 
words in the subordinate clause have indirect reference, 
so that the reference, not the sense, of the subordinate 
clause is a thought; or else that, on account of the pres- 
ence of an indefinite indicator, the subordinate clause is 
incomplete and expresses a thought only when combined 
with the main clause. It may happen, however, that the 
sense of the subsidiary clause is a complete thought, in 
which case it can be replaced by another of the same truth 
value without harm to the truth of the whole— provided 
there are no grammatical obstacles. 

An examination of all the subordinate clauses which one 
may encounter will soon provide some which do not fit 
well into these categories. The reason, so far as I can 
see, is that these subordinate clauses have no such sim- 
ple sense. Almost always, it seems, we connect with the 
main thoughts expressed by us subsidiary thoughts which, 
although not expressed, are associated with our words, in 
accordance with psychological laws, by the hearer. And 
since the subsidiary thought appears to be connected with 
our words of its own accord, almost like the main thought 
itself, we want it also to be expressed. The sense of the 
sentence is thereby enriched, and it may well happen that 
we have more simple thoughts than clauses. In many 
cases the sentence must be understood in this way, in oth- 
ers it may be doubtful whether the subsidiary thought be- 
longs to the sense of the sentence or only accompanies 
it. 1141 One might perhaps find that the sentence 

Napoleon, who recog- 
nized the danger to his 
right flank, himself led 
his guards against the 
enemy position 

expresses not only the two thoughts shown above, but also 
the thought that the knowledge of the danger was the rea- 
son why he led the guards against the enemy position. 
One may in fact doubt whether this thought is merely 
slightly suggested or really expressed. Let the question 
be considered whether our sentence be false if Napoleon's 
decision had already been made before he recognized the 
danger. If our sentence could be true in spite of this, the 
subsidiary thought should not be understood as part of the 
sense. One would probably decide in favour of this. The 
alternative would make for a quite complicated situation: 
We would have more simple thoughts than clauses. If the 
sentence 



Napoleon recognized the 
danger to his right flank 

were now to be replaced by another having the same truth 
value, e.g. 

Napoleon was already 
more than 45 years old 

not only would our first thought be changed, but also 
our third one. Hence the truth value of the latter might 
change— viz. if his age was not the reason for the deci- 
sion to lead the guards against the enemy. This shows 
why clauses of equal truth value cannot always be substi- 
tuted for one another in such cases. The clause expresses 
more through its connexion with another than it does in 
isolation. 

Let us now consider cases where this regularly happens. 
In the sentence: 

Bebel mistakenly sup- 
poses that the return of 
Alsace-Lorraine would 
appease France's desire 
for revenge. 

two thoughts are expressed, which are not however shown 
by means of antecedent and consequent clauses, viz.: 

(1) Bebel believes that the 
return of Alsace-Lorraine 
would appease France's 
desire for revenge 

(2) The return of Alsace- 
Lorraine would not ap- 
pease France's desire for 
revenge. 

In the expression of the first thought, the words of the 
subordinate clause have their indirect reference, while the 
same words have their customary reference in the expres- 
sion of the second thought. This shows that the subor- 
dinate clause in our original complex sentence is to be 
taken twice over, with different reference, standing once 
for a thought, once for a truth value. Since the truth value 
is not the whole reference of the subordinate clause, we 
cannot simply replace the latter by another of equal truth 
value. Similar considerations apply to expressions such 
as 'know', 'discover', 'it is known that'. 

By means of a subordinate causal clause and the associ- 
ated main clause we express several thoughts, which how- 
ever do not correspond separately to the original clauses. 
In the sentence: 'Because ice is less dense than water, it 
floats on water' we have 



9 



(1) Ice is less dense than 
water; 

(2) If anything is less 
dense than water, it floats 
on water; 

(3) Ice floats on water. 

The third thought, however, need not be explicitly intro- 
duced, since it is contained in the remaining two. On the 
other hand, neither the first and third nor the second and 
third combined would furnish the sense of our sentence. 
It can now be seen that our subordinate clause 

because ice is less dense 
than water 

expresses our first thought, as well as a part of our second. 
This is how it comes to pass that our subsidiary clause 
cannot be simply replaced by another of equal truth value; 
for this would alter our second thought and thereby might 
well alter its truth value. 

The situation is similar in the sentence 

If iron were less dense 
than water, it would float 
on water. 

Here we have the two thoughts that iron is not less dense 
than water, and that something floats on water if it is less 
dense than water. The subsidiary clause again expresses 
one thought and a part of the other. 

If we interpret the sentence already considered 

After Schleswig-Holstein 
was separated from Den- 
mark, Prussia and Austria 
quarreled 

In such a way that it expresses the thought that Schleswig- 
Holstein was once separated from Denmark, we have first 
this thought, and secondly the thought that at a time, more 
closely determined by the subordinate clause, Prussia and 
Austria quarreled. Here also the subordinate clause ex- 
presses not only one thought but also a part of another. 
Therefore it may not in general be replaced by another of 
the same truth value. 

It is hard to exhaust all the possibilities given by language; 
but I hope to have brought to light at least the essential 
reasons why a subordinate clause may not always be re- 
placed by another of equal truth value without harm to 
the truth of the whole sentence structure. These reasons 
arise: 

(1) when the subordinate 
clause does not stand for 



a truth value, inasmuch 
as it expresses only part 
of a thought; 

(2) when the subordinate 
clause does stand for a 
truth value but is not re- 
stricted to so doing, inas- 
much as its sense includes 
one thought and part of 
another. 

The first case arises: 

(a) in indirect reference 
of words 

(b) if part of the sentence 
is only an indefinite indi- 
cator instead of a proper 
name 

In the second case, the subsidiary clause may have to be 
taken twice over, viz. once in its customary reference, and 
the other time in indirect reference; or the sense of a part 
of the subordinate clause may likewise be a component of 
another thought, which, taken together with the thought 
directly expressed by the subordinate clause, makes up 
the sense of the whole sentence. 

It follows with sufficient probability from the foregoing 
that the cases where a subordinate clause is not replace- 
able by another of the same value cannot be brought in 
disproof of our view that a truth value is the reference of 
a sentence having a thought as its sense. 

Let us return to our starting point. 

When we found 'a = a' and 'a = b' to have different cog- 
nitive values, the explanation is that for the purpose of 
knowledge, the sense of the sentence, viz., the thought 
expressed by it, is no less relevant than its reference, i.e. 
its truth value. If now a = b, then indeed the reference 
of 'b' is the same 'a', and thereby the sense expressed in 
'a = b' differs from that of 'a = a'. In that case the two 
sentences do not have the same cognitive value. If we 
understand by 'judgment' the advance from the thought 
to its truth value, as in the above paper, we can also say 
that the judgments are different. 

1 Notes 

1 A I use this word in the sense of identity and understand 
'a = b' to have the sense of 'a is the same as b' or 'a and b 
coincide'. 

2 A In the case of an actual proper name such as Aris- 
totle' opinions as to the sense may differ. It might, for 
instance, be taken to be the following: the pupil of Plato 



10 



1 NOTES 



and teacher of Alexander the Great. Anybody who does 
this will attach another sense to the sentence Aristotle 
was born in Stagira' than will a man who takes as the 
sense of the name: the teacher of Alexander the Great 
who was born in Stagira. So long as the reference remains 
the same, such variations of sense may be tolerated, al- 
though they are to be avoided in the theoretical structure 
of a demonstrative science and ought not to occur in a 
perfect language. 

3 A We may include with ideas direct experiences: here, 
sense impressions and acts themselves take the place of 
traces which they have left in the mind. The distinction is 
unimportant for our purpose, especially since memories 
of sense-impressions and acts always go along with such 
impressions and acts themselves to complete the percep- 
tual image. One may on the other hand understand direct 
experience as including any object in so far as it is sensi- 
bly perceptible or spatial. 

4 A Hence it is inadvisable to use the word 'idea' to desig- 
nate something so basically different. 

5 A By a thought I understand not the subjective perfor- 
mance of thinking but its objective content, which is ca- 
pable of being the common property of several thinkers. 

6 A It would be desirable to have a special term for signs 
intended to have only sense. If we name them say, rep- 
resentation, the words of the actors on the stage would 
be representations; indeed the actor himself would be a 
representation. 

7 A A judgment, for me is not the mere grasping of a 
thought, but the admission of its truth. 

8 A In A lied in saying he had seen B', the subordinate 
clause designates a thought which is said (1) to have been 
asserted by A (2) while A was convinced of its falsity. 

9 A In accordance with what was said above, an expression 
of the kind in question must actually always be assured 
of meaning, by means of a special stipulation, e.g. by 
the convention that it shall count as meaning 0 when the 
concept applies to no object or to more than one. 

10 A In the case of these sentences, various interpreta- 
tions are easily possible. The sense of the sentence, After 
Schleswig-Holstein was separated from Denmark, Prus- 
sia and Austria quarreled' can also be rendered in the form 
After the separation of Schleswig-Holstein from Den- 
mark, Prussia and Austria quarreled.' In this version, it is 
surely sufficiently clear that the sense is not to be taken as 
having as a part the thought that Schleswig-Holstein was 
once separated from Denmark, but that this is the neces- 
sary presupposition in order for the expression 'after the 
separation of Schleswig-Holstein from Denmark' to have 
any meaning at all. To be sure, our sentence can also 
be interpreted as saying that Schleswig-Holstein was once 
separated from Denmark. We then have a case which is 
to be considered later. In order to understand the differ- 
ence more clearly, let us project ourselves into the mind 
of a Chinese who, having little knowledge of European 



history, believes it false that Schleswig-Holstein was ever 
separated from Denmark. He will take our sentence, in 
the first version, to be neither true nor false but will deny 
it to have any meaning, on the ground that its subordinate 
clause lacks a meaning. This clause would only appar- 
ently determine a time. If he interpreted our sentence 
in the second way, however, he would find a thought ex- 
pressed in it which he would take to be false, beside a part 
which would be without meaning. 

1 1 A At times there is no linguistically explicit indicator 
and one must be read off from the entire context. 

12 A Similarly in the case of 'but', 'yet'. 

13 A The thought of our sentence might also be expressed 
thus: 'Either the Sun has not risen yet or the sky is very 
cloudy'— which shows how this kind of sentence connec- 
tion is to be understood. 

14 A This may be important for the question whether an 
assertion is a lie, or an oath a perjury. 



11 



Text and image sources, contributors, and licenses 

Text 

On Sense and Reference Source: http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/On%20Sense%20and%20Reference?oldid=4276834 Contributors: Yann, 
Jusjih, John Vandenberg, PoliticalBot, WAdeVries, ResidentScholai', Oreo Priest, Ingram, Billinghurst, JeepdaySock, Rhalah and Anony- 
mous: 12 



Images 

File:PD-icon.svg Source: http://upload.wikimedia.Org/wikipedia/commons/6/62/PD-icon.svg License: Public domain Contributors: Cre- 
ated by uploader. Based on similar symbols. Original artist: Various. See log. (Original SVG was based on File:PD-icon.png by 
Duesentrieb, which was based on Image:Red copyright. png by Rfl.) 



Content license 

Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 



