
STOP 



Early Journal Content on JSTOR, Free to Anyone in the World 

This article is one of nearly 500,000 scholarly works digitized and made freely available to everyone in 
the world by JSTOR. 

Known as the Early Journal Content, this set of works include research articles, news, letters, and other 
writings published in more than 200 of the oldest leading academic journals. The works date from the 
mid-seventeenth to the early twentieth centuries. 

We encourage people to read and share the Early Journal Content openly and to tell others that this 
resource exists. People may post this content online or redistribute in any way for non-commercial 
purposes. 

Read more about Early Journal Content at http://about.jstor.org/participate-jstor/individuals/early- 
journal-content . 



JSTOR is a digital library of academic journals, books, and primary source objects. JSTOR helps people 
discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content through a powerful research and teaching 
platform, and preserves this content for future generations. JSTOR is part of ITHAKA, a not-for-profit 
organization that also includes Ithaka S+R and Portico. For more information about JSTOR, please 
contact support@jstor.org. 



164 



THE ADVOCATE OF PEACE. 



September, 



Count Tolstoy on the Russo-Japanese 
War.* 

" BETHINK YOURSELVES ! " 

" This is your hour, and the power of darkness." — Luke 22 : 53. 

I. 

Again war. Again sufferings, necessary to nobody, 
utterly uncalled for; again fraud, again the universal 
stupefaction and brutalization of men. 

Men who are separated from each other by thousands 
of miles, hundreds of thousands of such men, — on the 
one hand, Buddhists, whose law forbids the killing, not 
only of men, but of animals ; on the other hand, Chris- 
tians, professing the law of brotherhood and love, — 
like wild beasts on land and on sea are seeking out each 
other, in order to kill, torture and mutilate each other 
in the most cruel way. What can this be? Is it a 
dream or a reality ? Something is taking place which 
should not, cannot be ; one longs to believe that it is a 
dream and to awake from it. 

But no, it is not a dream, it is a dreadful reality ' 

One could yet understand how a poor, uneducated, 
defrauded Japanese, torn from his field and taught that 
Buddhism consists not in compassion to all that lives, 
but in sacrifices to idols, and how a similar poor illiterate 
fellow from the neighborhood of Toula or Nijni Nov- 
gorod, who has been taught that Christianity consists 
in worshipping Christ, the Madonna, Saints, and their 
ikons, — one could understand how these unfortunate 
men, brought by the violence and deceit of centuries to 
recognize the greatest crime in the world, the murder 
of one's brethren, as a virtuous act, can commit these 
dreadful deeds, without regarding themselves as being 
guilty in so doing. 

But how can so-called enlightened men preach war, 
support it, participate in it, and, worst of all, without 
suffering the dangers of war themselves, incite others 
to it, sending their unfortunate, defrauded brothers to 
fight ? These so-called enlightened men cannot possibly 
ignore, I do not say the Christian law, if they recognize 
themselves to be Christians, but all that has been writ- 
ten, is being written, has and is being said, about the 
cruelty, futility and senselessness of war. They are re- 
garded as enlightened men precisely because they know 
all this. The majority of them have themselves written 
and spoken about this. Not to mention the Hague Con- 
ference, which called forth universal praise, or all the 
books, pamphlets, newspaper articles and speeches dem- 
onstrating the possibility of the solution of international 
misunderstandings by international arbitration, — no en- 
lightened man can help knowing that the universal 
competition in the armaments of states must inevitably 
lead them to endless wars, or to a general bankruptcy, 
or else to both the one and the other. They cannot but 
know that besides the senseless, purposeless expenditure 
of milliards of roubles, that is, of human labor, on the 
preparations for war, during the wars themselves millions 
of the most energetic and vigorous men perish in that 
period of their life which is best for productive labor 



• Translated by V. Tchertkoff, editor of the Free Age Press, 13 Pater- 
noster Row, London, and I. F. M. First published in the London Times. 
June 27, 1904. 

[No Eights Reserved.] 



(during the past century wars have destroyed fourteen 
million men). Enlightened men cannot but know that 
occasions for war are always such as are not worth not 
only one human life, but not one-hundredth part of all 
that which is spent upon wars (in fighting for the eman- 
cipation of the negroes much more was spent than it 
would have cost to redeem them from, slavery). 

Every one knows and cannot help knowing that, 
above all, wars, calling forth the lowest animal passions, 
deprave and brutalize men. Every one knows the weak- 
ness of the arguments in favor of war, such as were 
brought forward by De Maistre, Moltke and others, for 
they are all founded on the sophism that in every human 
calamity it is possible to find an advantageous element, 
or else upon the utterly arbitrary assertion that wars 
have always existed and therefore always must exist, as 
if the bad actions of men could be justified by the ad- 
vantages or the usefulness which they realize, or by the 
consideration that they have been committed during a 
long period of time. All so-called enlightened men 
know all this. Then suddenly war begins and all this 
is instantly forgotten, and the same men, who but yes- 
terday were proving the cruelty, futility, the senseless- 
ness of wars, now think, speak and write only about 
killing as many men as possible, about ruining and de- 
stroying the greatest possible amount of the productions 
of human labor, and about exciting as much as possible 
the passion of hatred in those peaceful, harmless, indus- 
trious men who by their labor feed, clothe, maintain 
these same pseudo-enlightened men, who compel them 
to commit those dreadful deeds contrary to their con- 
science, welfare or faith. 

II. 

EXCUSES BY WHICH THE WAR IS JUSTIFIED. 

Something is taking place incomprehensible and im- 
possible in its cruelty, falsehood and stupidity. The 
Russian Czar, the same man who exhorted all the na- 
tions in the cause of peace, publicly announces that, 
notwithstanding all his efforts to maintain the peace so 
dear to his heart, efforts which express themselves 
in the seizing of other people's lands and in the 
strengthening of armies for the defense of these stolen 
lands, he, owing to the attack of the Japanese, com- 
mands that the same shall be done to the Japanese as 
they had commenced doing to the Russians, that is, 
that they should be slaughtered ; and in announcing this 
call to murder he mentions God, asking the divine bless- 
ing on the most dreadful crime in the world. The Jap- 
anese Emperor has proclaimed the same thing in relation 
to the Russians. 

Men of science and of law (Messieurs Muravieff and 
Martens) strenuously try to prove that in the recent call 
of all nations to universal peace and the present incite- 
ment to war, because of the seizure of other people's 
lands, there is no contradiction. Diplomatists, in their 
refined French language, publish and send out circulars 
in which they circumstantially and diligently prove, 
though they know no one believes them, that, after all 
its efforts to establish peaceful relations, — in reality, 
after all its efforts to deceive other countries, — the Rus- 
sian government has been compelled to have recourse to 
the only means for a rational solution of the question, 



1904 



THE ADVOCATE OF PEACE. 



165 



that is, to the murder of men. The same thing is written 
by Japanese diplomatists. Scientists, historians and 
philosophers, on their side, comparing the present with 
the past, deduct from these comparisons profound con- 
clusions, and argue interminably about the laws of the 
movement of nations, about the relation between the 
yellow and white races, or about Buddhism and Chris- 
tianity ; and on the basis of these deductions and argu- 
ments they justify the slaughter of those belonging to 
the yellow race by Christians ; while in the same way 
the Japanese scientists and philosophers justify the 
slaughter of those of the white race. Journalists, with- 
out concealing their joy, try to outdo each other, and, 
not hesitating at any falsehood, however impudent and 
transparent, prove in all possible ways that the Russians 
only are right and strong and good in every respect, and 
that all the Japanese are wrong and weak and bad in 
every respect, and that all those are also bad who are 
inimical or may become inimical toward the Russians — 
the English, the Americans; and the same is proved 
likewise by the Japanese and their supporters in relation 
to the Russians. 

Not to mention the military, who in the way of their 
profession prepare for murder, crowds of so-called en- 
lightened people, such as professors, social reformers, 
students, nobles, merchants, without being forced thereto 
by anything or any one, express the most bitter and con- 
temptuous feelings toward the Japanese, the English, or 
the Americans, toward whom but yesterday they were 
either well-disposed or indifferent; while, without the 
least compulsion, they express the most abject, servile 
feelings toward the Czar, to whom, to say the least, they 
were completely indifferent, assuring him of their un- 
limited love and readiness to sacrifice their lives in his 
interests. 

This unfortunate, entangled young man, recognized as 
the leader of one hundred and thirty million of people, 
continually deceived and compelled to contradict himself, 
confidently thanks and blesses the troops whom he calls 
his own for murder in defense of lands which with yet 
less right he also calls his own. All present to each 
other hideous ikons in which not only no one amongst 
the educated believe, but which unlearned peasants are 
beginning to abandon ; all bow down to the ground be- 
fore these ikons, kiss them, and pronounce pompous and 
deceitful speeches in which no one really believes. 

Wealthy people contribute insignificant portions of 
their immorally acquired riches for this cause of murder 
or the organization of help in connection with the work 
of murder, while the poor, from whom the government 
annually collects two milliards, deem it necessary to do 
likewise, giving their mites also. The government incites 
and encourages crowds of idlers, who walk about the 
streets with the Czar's portrait, singing, shouting hurrah ! 
and who, under pretext of patriotism, are licensed in all 
kinds of excess. All over Russia, from the palace to the 
remotest village, the pastors of churches, calling them- 
selves Christians, appeal to that God who has enjoined 
love to one's enemies, to the God of Love Himself, to 
help the work of the devil to further the slaughter of 
men. 

Stupefied by prayers, sermons, exhortations, by pro- 
cessions, pictures, and newspapers, the cannon's flash, 
hundreds of thousands of men, uniformly dressed, carry- 



ing divers deadly weapons, leaving their parents, wives, 
children, with hearts of agony, but with artificial spright- 
liness, go where they, risking their own lives, will com- 
mit the most dreadful act of killing men whom they 
do not know and who have done them no harm. And 
they are followed by doctors and nurses, who somehow 
imagine that at home they cannot serve simple, peaceful, 
suffering people, but can only serve those who are en- 
gaged in slaughtering each other. Those who remain at 
home are gladdened by news of the murder of men, and 
when they learn that many Japanese have been killed 
they thank some one whom they call God. 

All this is not only regarded as the manifestation of 
elevated feeling, but those who refrain from such mani- 
festations, if they endeavor to disabuse men, are deemed 
traitors and betrayers, and are in danger of being abused 
and beaten by a brutalized crowd which, in defense of 
its insanity and cruelty, can possess no other weapon 
than brute force. 

III. 

AS IF JESUS HAD NEVER EXISTED AND TAUGHT. 

It is as if there had never existed either Voltaire, or 
Montaigne, or Pascal, or Swift, or Kant, or Spinoza, or 
hundreds of other writers who have exposed, with great 
force, the madness and futility of war, and have de- 
scribed its cruelty, immorality and savagery ; and, above 
all, it is as if there had never existed Jesus and his teach- 
ing of human brotherhood and love of God and of men. 

One recalls all this to mind and looks around on what 
is now taking place, and one experiences horror less at 
the abominations of war than at that which is the 
most horrible of all horrors, the consciousness of the 
impotency of human reason. 

That which alone distinguishes man from the animal, 
— that which constitutes his merit, — his reason, is found 
to be an unnecessary, and not only a useless, but a per- 
nicious addition, which simply impedes action, like a 
bridle fallen from a horse's head and entangled in his 
legs and only irritating bim. 

It is comprehensible that a heathen, a Greek, a Ro- 
man, even a mediajval Christian, ignorant of the Gospel 
and blindly believing all the prescriptions of the Church, 
might fight, and, fighting, pride himself on his military 
achievements; but how can a believing Christian, or 
even a skeptic, involuntarily permeated by the Christian 
ideals of human brotherhood and love which have in- 
spired the works of the philosophers, moralists and artists 
of our time, — how can such. take a gun, or stand by a 
cannon, and aim at a crowd of his fellowmen, desiring 
to kill as many of them as possible ? 

The Assyrians, Romans, or Greeks might be persuaded 
that in fighting they were acting not only according to 
their conscience, but even fulfilling a righteous deed. 
But, whether we wish it or not, we are Christians, and 
however Christianity may have been distorted, its general 
spirit cannot but lift us to that higher plane of reason 
whence we can no longer refrain from feeling with our 
whole being not only the senselessness and the cruelty 
of war, but its complete opposition to all that we regard 
as good and right. Therefore, we cannot do as they did, 
with assurance, firmness and peace, and without a con- 
sciousness of our criminality, without the desperate feel- 
ing of a murderer, who, having begun to kill his victim, 



166 



THE ADVOCATE OF PEACE. 



September, 



and feeling in the depths of his soul the guilt of his act, 
proceeds to try to stupefy or infuriate himself, to be able 
the better to complete his dreadful deed. All the un- 
natural, feverish, hot-headed, insane excitement which 
has now seized the idle upper ranks of Russian society is 
merely the symptom of their recognition of the crimi- 
nality of the work which is being done. All these inso- 
lent, mendacious speeches about devotion to, and worship 
of, the Monarch, about readiness to sacrifice life, or 
one should say other people's lives, and not one's own ; 
all these promises to defend with one's breast land which 
does not belong to one ; all these senseless benedictions 
of each other with various banners and monstrous ikons ; 
all these Te Deums ; all these preparations of blankets 
and bandages ; all these detachments of nurses ; all these 
contributions to the fleet and to the Red Cross presented 
to the government, whose direct duty is, whilst it has 
the possibility of collecting from the people as much 
money as it requires, having declared war, to organize 
the necessary fleet and necessary means for attending the 
wounded ; all these Slavonic, pompous, senseless and 
blasphemous prayers, the utterance of which in various 
towns is communicated in the papers as important news ; 
all these processions, calls for the national hymn, cheers ; 
all this dreadful, desperate, newspaper mendacity, which, 
being universal, does not fear exposure ; all this stupe- 
faction and brutalization which has now taken hold of 
Russian society, and which is being transmitted by de- 
grees also to the masses, — all this is only a symptom of 
the guilty consciousness of that dreadful act which is 
being accomplished. 

Spontaneous feeling tells men that what they are doing 
should not be ; but, as the murderer who has begun to 
assassinate his victim cannot stop, so also Russian people 
now imagine that the fact of the deadly work having 
been commenced is an unanswerable argument in favor 
of war. War has been begun, and therefore it should 
go on. Thus it seems to simple, benighted, unlearned 
men acting under the influence of the petty passions and 
stupefaction to which they have been subjected. In ex- 
actly the same way the most educated men of our time 
argue to prove that man does not possess free will, and 
that, therefore, even were he to understand that the 
work he has commenced is evil, he can no longer cease 
to do it. 

And dazed, brutalized men continue their dreadful 
work. 

IV. 

REPLIES OF SOLDIERS, DIPLOMATS AND JOURNALISTS. 

Ask a soldier, a private, a corporal, a non-commissioned 
officer who has abandoned his old parents, his wife, his 
children, why he is preparing to kill men whom he does 
not know, he will at first be astonished at your question. 
He is a soldier, he has taken the oath, and it is his duty 
to fulfill the orders of his commanders. If you tell him 
that war, that is, the slaughter of men, does not conform 
to the command, "Thou shalt not kill," he will say, 
" And how if ours are attacked ? For the King. For 
the Orthodox faith." One of them said in answer to my 
question : " And how if he attacks that which is sacred ? " 
" What do you mean ? " I asked. " Why," said he, 
" the banner." And if you endeavor to explain to such 
a soldier that God's commandment is more important not 



only than the banner, but -than anything else in the 
world, he will become silent, or he will get angry and 
report you to the authorities. 

Ask an officer, a general, why he goes to the war, 
he will tell you that he is a military man, and that the 
military are indispensable for the defense of the father- 
land. As to murder not conforming to the spirit of the 
Christian law, this does not trouble him, as either he 
does not believe in this law, or, if he does, it is not in 
the law itself but in that explanation which has been 
given to this law. But, above all, he, like the soldier, in 
place of the personal question, what should he do him- 
self, always puts the general question about the state or 
the fatherland. "At the present moment, when the 
fatherland is in danger, one should act, and not argue," 
he will say. 

Ask the diplomatists, who by their deceits prepare 
wars, why they do it, they will tell you that the object 
of their activity is the establishment of peace between 
nations, and that this object is attained, not by ideal, 
unrealizable theories, but by diplomatic action and 
readiness for war. And, just as the military, instead of 
the question concerning one's own action, put the gen- 
eral question, so also diplomatists will speak about the 
interests of Russia, about the unscrupulousness of other 
powers, about the balance of power in Europe, but not 
about their own position and its activities. 

Ask the journalists why, by their writings, they in- 
cite men to war, they will say that wars in general are 
necessary and useful, especially the present war, and 
they will confirm this opinion of theirs by misty patriotic 
phrases, and, just like the military and diplomatist, in re- 
sponse to the question why he, a journalist, a particular 
individual, a living man, acts in a certain way, he will 
speak about the general interests of the nation, about 
the state, civilization, the white race. In the same way, 
all those who prepare war will explain their participation 
in that work. They will perhaps agree that it would be 
desirable to abolish war, but at present this is impossible. 
At present they, as Russians and as men who occupy 
certain positions, such as heads of the nobility, repre- 
sentatives of local self-government, doctors, workers of 
the Red Cross, are called upon to act and not to argue. 
" There is no time to argue and to think of oneself," 
they will say, " when there is a great common work to 
be done." The same will be said by the Czar, seemingly 
responsible for the whole thing. He, like the soldier, 
will be astonished at the question, whether war is now 
necessary. He does not even admit the idea that the 
war might yet be arrested. He will say that he cannot 
refrain from fulfilling that which is demanded of him by 
the whole nation, that, although he does recognize that 
war is a great evil, and has used, and is ready to use, all 
possible means for its abolition, in the present case he 
could not help declaring war, and cannot help continuing 
it. It is necessary for the welfare and glory of Russia. 

Every one of these men, to the question why he, so 
and so, Ivan, Peter, Nicholas, whilst recognizing as bind- 
ing upon him the Christian law which not only forbids 
the killing of one's neighbor, but demands that one should 
love him, serve him, — why he permits himself to partici- 
pate in war, that is, in violence, loot, murder, will infalli- 
bly answer the same thing : that he is thus acting in the 
name of his fatherland, or faith, or oath, or honor, or 



1904. 



THE ADVOCATE OF PEACE. 



167 



civilization, or the future welfare of the whole of man- 
kind, in general, of something abstract and indefinite. 
Moreover, these men are always so urgently occupied 
either by preparation for war, or by its organization, or 
discussions about it, that in their leisure time they can 
only rest from their labors, and have not time to occupy 
themselves with discussions about their life, regarding 
such discussions as idle. 

V. 

ON THE EDGE OF A PRECIPICE. 

Men of our Christian world and of our time are like a 
man who, having missed the right turning, the further 
he goes the more he becomes convinced that he is going 
the wrong way. Yet the greater his doubts the quicker 
and the more desperately does he hurry on, consoling 
himself with the thought that he will arrive somewhere. 
But the time comes when it becomes quite clear that the 
way along which he is going will lead to nothing but a 
precipice, which he is already beginning to discern before 
him. 

In such a position stands the Christian humanity of 
our time. It is perfectly evident that, if we continue to 
live as we are now living, guided in our private lives, as 
well as in the life of separate states, by the sole desire 
of welfare for ourselves and for our state, and to think, 
as we do now, to ensure this welfare by violence, then, 
inevitably increasing the means of violence of one 
against the other and of state against state, we shall 
first keep ruling ourselves more and more, transferring 
the major portion of our productiveness to armaments ; 
and, secondly, by killing in mutual wars the best physi- 
cally developed men, we must become more and more 
degenerate and morally depraved. 

That this will be the case, if we do not alter our life, 
is as certain as it is mathematically certain that two non- 
parallel straight lines must meet. But not only is this 
theoretically certain in our times ; it is becoming certain 
not only to the mind, but also to the consciousness. The 
precipice toward which we are approaching is already 
becoming apparent to us, and the most simple, non-phil- 
osophizing and uneducated men cannot but see that, by 
arming ourselves more and more against each other and 
slaughtering each other in war, we, like spiders in a jar, 
can come to nothing else but the destruction of each other. 

A sincere, serious, rational man can no longer console 
himself by the thought that matters can be mended, as 
was formerly supposed, by a universal empire such as 
that of Rome or of Charles the Great, or Napoleon, or 
by the mediseval spiritual power of the Pope, or by holy 
alliances, by the political balance of the European Con- 
cert, and by peaceful international tribunals, or, as some 
have thought, by the increase of military strength and 
the newly discovered powerful weapons of destruction. 

It is impossible to organize a universal empire or 
republic, consisting of European states, as different 
nationalities will never desire to unite into one state. 
To organize international tribunals for the solution of 
international disputes ? But who will impose obedience 
to the decision of the tribunal upon a contending party 
who has an organized army of millions of men? To 
disarm ? No one desires it or will begin it. To invent 
yet more dreadful means of destruction ? Balloons with 
bombs filled with suffocating gases, shells which men 



shower upon each other from above? Whatever may 
be invented, all states will furnish themselves with 
similar weapons of destruction. And cannon's flesh, as 
after cold weapons it submitted to bullets, and meekly 
exposed itself to shells, bombs, far-reaching guns, mi- 
trailleuses, mines, so it will also submit to bombs charged 
with suffocating gases scattered down upon it from 
balloons. 

Nothing shows more evidently than the speeches of 
M. Muravieff and Professor Martens about the Japa- 
nese war not contradicting the Hague Peace Confer- 
ence, — nothing shows more obviously than these speeches 
to what an extent, amongst the men of our time, the 
means for the transmission of thought — speech — is dis- 
torted, and how the capacity for clear, rational thinking 
is completely lost. Thought and speech are used for 
the purpose, not of serving as a guide for human activity, 
but of justifying any activity, however criminal it may 
be. The late Boer war and the present Japanese war, 
which can at any moment pass into a universal slaughter, 
have proved this beyond all doubt. All anti-military 
discussions can as little contribute to the cessation of 
war as the most eloquent and persuasive considerations 
addressed to fighting dogs as to its being more advan- 
tageous to divide the piece of meat over which they are 
struggling than to mutilate each other and lose the piece 
of meat, which will be carried away by some passing 
dog not joining in the fight. 

We are dashing on toward the precipice, cannot stop, 
and we are approaching its edge. 

For every rational man who reflects upon the position 
in which humanity is now placed and upon that which 
it is inevitably approaching, it cannot but be obvious 
that there is no practical issue out of this position, that 
one cannot devise any combination or organization 
which would save us from the destruction toward which 
we are inevitably rushing. 

Not to mention the economical problems which be- 
come more and more complex, those mutual relations 
between the states arming themselves against each other 
and at any moment ready to break out into wars clearly 
point to the certain destruction toward which all so- 
called civilized humanity is being carried. 

Then what is to be done ? 



VI. 



THE ONLY REMEDY. 

Two thousand years ago John the Baptist and then 
Jesus said to men : The time is fulfilled and the King- 
dom of God is at hand, bethink yourselves (jueTai/oefre) 
and believe in the Gospel (Mark 1 : 15) ; and if you 
do not bethink yourselves you will all perish (Luke 
13: 5). 

But men did not listen to them, and the destruction 
they foretold is already near to hand. And we men of 
our time cannot but see it. We are already perishing, 
and therefore we cannot leave unheeded that old-in- 
time, but for us new, means of salvation. We cannot 
but see that besides all the other calamities which flow 
from our bad and irrational life, military preparations 
alone and the wars inevitably growing from them must 
infallibly destroy us. We cannot but see that all the 
means of escape invented by men from these evils are 



J 68 



THE ADVOCATE OF PEACE. 



September, 



found and must be found to be ineffectual, and that the 
disastrous position of the nations arming themselves 
against each other cannot but go on advancing continu- 
ally. And therefore the words of Jesus refer to us and 
our time more than to any time or to any one. 

Jesus said, " Bethink yourselves," that is, " Let every 
man interrupt the work he has begun and ask himself: 
Who am I ? From whence have I appeared, and in what 
consists my destination ? And having answered these 
questions, according to the answer decide whether that 
which thou doest is in conformity with thy destination." 
And every man of our world and time, that is, being 
acquainted with the essence of the Christian teaching, 
needs only for a minute to interrupt his activity, to for- 
get the capacity in which he is regarded by men, be it 
of emperor, soldier, minister, or journalist, and seri- 
ously ask himself who he is and what is his destination, 
in order to begin to doubt the utility, lawfulness, and 
reasonableness of his actions. "Before I am emperor, 
soldier, minister, or journalist," must say to himself 
every man of our time and of the Christian world, "be- 
fore any of these I am a man, that is, an organic being 
sent by the Higher Will into a universe endless in time 
and space, in order, after staying in it for an instant, to 
die, that is, to disappear from it. And therefore all those 
personal, social, and even universal human aims I may 
place before myself, and which are placed before me by 
my fellowmen, are all insignificant, owing to the shortness 
of my life as well as to the boundlessness of the life of 
the universe, and should be subordinated to that higher 
aim for the attainment of which I am sent into the world. 
This ultimate aim, owing to my limitations, is inacces- 
sible to me, but it does exist, as there must be a purpose 
in all that exists, and my business is that of being its 
tool, that is, my destination is that of being a workman 
of God, of fulfilling His work." And having understood 
this destination, every man of our world and time, from 
emperor to soldier, cannot but regard differently those 
duties which he has taken upon himself or other men 
have imposed upon him. 

" Before I was crowned, recognized as emperor," must 
the emperor say to himself, " before I undertook to fulfill 
the duties of the head of the state, I, by the very fact 
that I live, have promised to fulfill that which is de- 
manded of me by the Higher Will that sent me into life. 
These demands I not only know, but feel in my heart. 
They consist, as it is expressed in the Christian law, 
which I profess, in that I should submit to the will of 
God, and fulfill that which it requires of me, that I should 
love my neighbor, serve him, and act towards him as I 
would wish others to act towards me. Am I doing this, 
while ruling men, prescribing violence, executions, and, 
the most dreadful of all, wars ? 

" Men tell me that I ought to do this. But God says 
that I ought to do something quite different. And 
therefore, however much I may be told that, as the head 
of the state, I must direct acts of violence, the levying 
of taxes, executions, and, above all, war, that is, the 
slaughter of one's neighbor, I do not wish to and cannot 
do these things." 

So must say to himself the soldier, who is taught that 
he must kill men, and the minister, who deemed it his 
duty to prepare for war, and the journalist, who incited 
to war, and every man who puts to himself the question, 



Who is he, what is his destination in life? And the 
moment the head of the state will cease to direct war, 
the soldier to fight, the minister to prepare means for 
war, the journalist to incite thereto, then, without any 
new institutions, adaptations, balance of power, tribunals, 
there will of itself be destroyed that hopeless position in 
which men have placed themselves, not only in relation 
to war, but also to all other calamities which they them- 
selves inflict upon themselves. 

So that, however strange this may appear, the most 
effective and certain deliverance of men from all the 
calamities which they inflict upon themselves and from 
the most dreadful of all, war, is attainable, not by any 
external general measures, but merely by that simple 
appeal to the consciousness of each separate man which, 
nineteen hundred years ago, was proposed by Jesus, that 
every man bethink himself, and ask himself, who is he, 
why he lives, and what he should and should not do. 

VII. 

TRUE RELIGION NEEDED. 

The evil from which men of our time are suffering is 
produced by the fact that the majority live without that 
which alone affords a rational guidance for human activ- 
ity — without religion, not that religion which consists 
in belief in dogmas, in the fulfillment of rites which afford 
a pleasant diversion, consolation, stimulant, but that re- 
ligion which establishes the relation of man to the All, 
to God, and therefore gives a general higher direction 
to all human activity, and without which people stand 
on the plane of animals and even lower than they. This 
evil which is leading men to inevitable destruction has 
manifested itself with special power in our time, because, 
having lost all rational guidance in life, and having 
directed all efforts to discoveries and improvements 
principally in the sphere of technical knowledge, men 
of our time have developed in themselves enormous 
power over the forces of nature ; but, not having any 
guidance for the rational adaptation of this power, they 
naturally have used it for the satisfaction of their lowest 
and most animal propensities. 

Bereft of religion, men possessing enormous power 
over the forces of nature are like children to whom 
powder or explosive gas has been given as a plaything. 
Considering this power which men of our time possess, 
and the way they use it, one feels that considering the 
degree of their moral development men have no right, 
not only to the use of railways, steam, electricity, tele- 
phones, photography, wireless telegraphs, but even to 
the simple art of manufacturing iron and steel, as all 
these improvements and arts they use only for the satis- 
faction of their lusts, for amusement, dissipation, and the 
destruction of each other. 

Then, what is to be done? To reject all these im- 
provements of life, all this power acquired by humanity 
— to forget that which it has learnt ? This is impossible, 
however perniciously these mental acquisitions are used ; 
still they are acquisitions, and men cannot forget them. 
To alter those combinations of nations which have been 
formed during centuries and to establish new ones? To 
invent such new institutions as would hinder the minority 
from deceiving and exploiting the majority? To dis- 
seminate knowledge? All this has been tried, and is 
being done with great fervor. All these imaginary 



1904. 



THE ADVOCATE OF PEACE. 



169 



methods of improvement represent the chief methods of 
self-oblivion and of diverting one's attention from the 
consciousness of inevitable perdition. The boundaries of 
states are changed, institutions are altered, knowledge is 
disseminated, but within other boundaries, with other 
organizations, with increased knowledge men remain the 
same beasts, ready any minute to tear each other to. 
pieces, or the same slaves they have always been, and 
always will be while they continue to be guided, not by 
religious consciousness, but by passions, theories, and 
external influences. 

Man has no choice ; he must be the slave of the most 
unscrupulous and insolent amongst slaves, or else the 
servant of God, because for man there is only one way 
of being free, by uniting his will with the will of God. 
People bereft of religion, some repudiating religion 
itself, others recognizing as religion those external, mon- 
strous forms which have superseded it, and guided only 
by their personal lusts, fear, human laws, and, above all, 
by mutual hypnotism, cannot cease to be animals or 
slaves, and no external efforts can extricate them from 
this state, for only religion makes a man free. 

And most of the people of our time are deprived of it. 

VIII 

RELIGION IS LOVE TO GOD AND TO ONE'S NEIGHBOR- 

" But, in order to abolish the evil from which we are 
suffering," those will say who are preoccupied by various 
practical activities, " it would be necessary that not a 
few men only, but all men, should bethink themselves, 
and that, having done so, they should uniformly under- 
stand the destination of their lives, in the fulfillment of 
the will of God and in the service of one's neighbor. 

"Is this possible?" Not only possible, do I answer, 
but it is impossible that this should not take place. 

It is impossible for men not to bethink themselves, that 
is, impossible that each man should not put to himself the 
question as to who he is and wherefore he lives, for man, 
as a rational being, cannot live without seeking to know 
why he lives, and he has always put to himself this 
question, and always, according to the degree of his de- 
velopment, has answered it in his religious teaching. In 
our time, the inner contradiction in which men feel 
themselves elicits this question with special insistence, 
and demands an answer. It is impossible for men of 
our time to answer this question otherwise than by 
recognizing the law of life in love to men, and, in the 
service of them, this being for our time the only rational 
answer as to the meaning of human life, and this answer 
over nineteen hundred years ago has been expressed in 
the Christian religion, and is likewise known to the vast 
majority of all mankind. 

This answer in a latent state lives in the consciousness 
of all men of the Christian world of our time, but it does 
not openly express itself and serve as guidance for our 
life, only because, on the one hand, those who enjoy the 
greatest authority, so-called scientists, being under the 
coarse error that religion is a temporary and outgrown 
step in the development of mankind and that men can 
live without religion, inculcate this error to those of the 
masses who are beginning to be educated ; and, on the 
other hand, because those in power sometimes con- 
sciously, but often unconsciously, being under the error 
that the Church faith is Christian religion, endeavor to 



support and excite in the people crude superstitions 
given out as the Christian religion. 

If only these two deceptions were to be destroyed, 
then true religion, always latent in men of our time, 
would become evident and obligatory. 

To bring this about it is necessary that, on the one 
hand, men of science should understand that the prin- 
ciple of the brotherhood of all men and the rule of not 
doing unto others what one does not wish for one's self 
is not one casual idea out of a multitude of human 
theories which can be subordinated to any other consid- 
erations, but is an incontestable principle, standing 
higher than the rest, and flowing from the changeless 
relation of man to that which is eternal, to God, and is 
religion, all religion, and therefore always obligatory. 

On the other hand, it is necessary that those who, con- 
sciously or unconsciously, preach crude superstitions 
under the guise of Christianity should understand that 
all these dogmas, sacraments and rites which they sup- 
port and preach are not only, as they think, not harmless, 
but are in the highest degree pernicious, concealing from 
men that central religious truth which is expressed in the 
fulfillment of God's will in the service of men, and that 
the rule of acting toward others as one would wish 
others to act toward one's self is not one of the prescrip- 
tions of the Christian religion, but is the whole of practi- 
cal religion, as indeed is stated in the Gospels. 

To bring about that, men of our time should uniformly 
place before themselves the question of the meaning of 
life, and uniformly answer it ; it is only necessary that 
those who regard themselves as enlightened should 
cease to think and to inculcate to other generations that 
religion is atavism, the survival of a past wild state, and 
that for the good life of men the spreading of education is 
sufficient, that is, the spread of the most varied knowledge 
which is in some way to bring men to justice and to a 
moral life. These men should understand instead that 
for the good life of humanity religion is vital, and that 
this religion already exists and lives in the consciousness 
of the men of our time. Men who are intentionally and 
unintentionally stupefying the people by Church super- 
stitions should cease to do so, and recognize that what is 
important and binding in Christianity is not baptism, nor 
communion, nor profession of dogmas, etc., but only love 
to God and to one's neighbor, and the fulfilling of the 
commandment of acting toward others as one wishes 
to act toward one's self, and that in this lies all the law 
and the prophets. 

If only both pseudo- Christians and men of science 
understood and preached to children and to the unedu- 
cated these simple, clear, and necessary truths as they 
now preach their complicated, confused, and unnecessary 
theories, all men would uniformly understand the mean- 
ing of their lives, and recognize one and the same duties 
as flowing from this meaning. 

IX. 

HOW ACT NOW THAT WAR HAS BEGUN? 

But, " How are we to act now, immediately among 
ourselves in Russia ? At this moment, when our foes have 
already attacked us, are killing our people and threaten- 
ing us, what should be the action," I shall be asked, " of 
a Russian soldier, officer, general, Czar, private individual ? 
Are we, forsooth, to allow our enemies to ruin our pos- 



170 



THE ADVOCATE OF PEACE. 



September, 



sessions, to seize the productions of our labors, to carry 
away prisoners, or kill our men ? What are we to do 
now that this thing has begun ? " 

But before the work of war was commenced, by 
whomsoever it was commenced, every awakened man 
must answer, Before all else the work of my life was 
commenced. And the work of my life has nothing in 
common with recognition of the rights of the Chinese, 
Japanese, or Russians to Port Arthur. The work of my 
life consists in fulfilling the will of Him who sent me 
into this life. This will is known to me. This will is 
that I should love my neighbor and serve him. Then 
why should I, following temporary, casual, irrational and 
cruel demands, deviate from the known eternal and 
changeless law of all my life ? If there be a God, He 
will not ask me when I die, which may happen at any 
moment, whether I retained Chi-nam-po with its timber 
stores, or Port Arthur, or even that conglomeration 
which is called the Russian empire, which He did not 
confide to my care; but He will ask me what I have 
done with that life which He put at my disposal ; did I 
use it for the purpose for which it was predestined, and 
under the conditions for fulfilling which it was entrusted 
to me ? Have I fulfilled His law ? 

So that to this question as to what is to be done now, 
when war is commenced, for me, a man who understand 
my destination, whatever position I may occupy, there 
can be no other answer than this, whatever be my cir- 
cumstances, whether the war be commenced or not, 
whether thousands of Russians or Japanese be killed, 
whether not only Port Arthur be taken, but St. Peters- 
burg and Moscow, — I cannot act otherwise than as God 
demands of me, and therefore I as a man can neither 
directly nor indirectly, neither by directing, nor by help- 
ing, nor by inciting to it, participate in war ; I cannot, I 
do not wish to, and I will not. What will happen im- 
mediately or soon, from my ceasing to do that which is 
contrary to the will of God, I do not and cannot know, 
but I believe that from the fulfillment of the will of God 
there can follow nothing but that which is good for me 
and for all men. 

You speak with horror about what might happen if 
we Russians at this moment ceased to fight, and sur- 
rendered to the Japanese what they desire from us. 

But if it be true that the salvation of mankind from 
brutalization and self-destruction lies only in the estab- 
lishment amongst men of that true religion which de- 
mands that we should love our neighbor and serve him, 
with which it is impossible to disagree, then every war, 
every hour of war, and my participation in it, only ren- 
ders more difficult and distant the realization of this only 
possible salvation. 

So that, even if one places one's self on the unstable 
point of view of defining actions according to their pre- 
sumed consequences, even then the surrender to the Jap- 
anese by the Russians of all which the former desire of 
us, besides the unquestionable advantage of the cessation 
of ruin and slaughter, would be an approach to the only 
means of the salvation of mankind from destruction, 
whereas the continuance of the war, however it may end, 
will be a postponement of that only means of salvation. 

" Yet even if this be so," it is replied, " wars can cease 
only when all men, or the majority, will refuse to partici- 
pate in them. But the refusal of one man, whether he be 



Czar or soldier, would only unnecessarily, and without 
the slightest profit to any one, ruin his life. If the Rus- 
sian Czar were now to throw up the war, he would be 
dethroned, perhaps killed, in order to get rid of him ; if 
an ordinary man were to refuse military service he would 
be sent to a penal battalion and perhaps shot. Why, 
then, without the slightest use, should one throw away 
one's life, which may be profitable to society?" is the 
common question of those who do not think of the desti- 
nation of their life and therefore do not understand it. 

But this is not what is said and felt by any man who 
understands the destination of his life, that is, by any 
religious man. Such a man is guided in his activity, not 
by the presumed consequences of his action, but by the 
consciousness of the destination of his life. A factory 
workman goes to his factory and in it accomplishes the 
work which is allotted to him without considering what 
will be the consequence of his labor. In the same way 
a soldier acts, carrying out the will of his commanders. 
So acts a religious man in fulfilling the work prescribed 
to him by God, without arguing as to what precisely 
will come of that work. Therefore for a religious man 
there is no question as to whether many or few men act 
as he does, or of what may happen to him if he does that 
which he should do. He knows that besides life and 
death nothing can happen, and that life and death are in 
the hands of God, whom he obeys. 

A religious man acts thus and not otherwise, not 
because he desires to act thus, nor because it is advan- 
tageous to himself or to other men, but because, believ- 
ing that his life is in the hands of God, he cannot act 
otherwise. 

In this lies the distinction of the activity of religious 
men, and therefore it is that the salvation of men from 
the calamities which they inflict upon themselves can be 
realized only in that degree in which they are guided in 
their lives, not by advantage or arguments, but by 
religious consciousness. 

X 

LOVE YOUR ENEMIES AND YOU WILL HAVE NONE. 

" But how about the enemies that attack us ? " 

" Love your enemies and ye will have none," is said in 
the teaching of the Twelve Apostles. This answer is 
not merely words, as those may imagine who are accus- 
tomed to think that the recommendation of love to one's 
enemies is something hyperbolical, and signifies not that 
which is expressed, but something else. This answer is 
the indication of a very clear and definite activity, and 
of its consequences. 

To love one's enemies, the Japanese, the Chinese, 
those yellow people toward whom benighted men are 
now endeavoring to excite our hatred, to love them 
means not to kill them for the purpose of having the 
right of poisoning them with opium, as did the English ; 
not to kill them in order to seize their land, as was done 
by the French, the Russians and the Germans ; not to 
bury them alive in punishment for injuring roads, not to 
tie them together by their hair, not to drown them in 
their river Amur, as did the Russians. 

" A disciple is not above his master. ... It is enough 
for a disciple that he be as his master." 

To love the yellow people, whom we call our foes, 
means, not to teach them under the name of Christianity 



1904 



THE ADVOCATE OF PEACE. 



171 



absurd superstitions about the fall of man, redemption, 
resurrection, etc., not to teach them the art of deceiving 
and killing others, but to teach them justice, unselfish- 
ness, compassion, love, and that not by words, but by 
the example of our own good life. 

And what have we been doing to them, and are still 
doing ? 

If we did indeed love our enemies, if even now we 
began to love our enemies, the Japanese, we would have 
no enemy. 

Therefore, however strange it may appear to those 
occupied with military plans, preparations, diplomatic 
considerations, administrative, financial, economical meas- 
ures, revolutionary, socialistic propaganda, and various 
unnecessary sciences, by which they think to save man- 
kind from its calamities, the deliverance of man, not 
only from the calamities of war, but also from all the 
calamities which men inflict upon themselves, will take 
place not through emperors or kings instituting peace 
alliances, not through those who would dethrone emper- 
ors, kings, or restrain them by constitutions, or substi- 
tute republics for monarchies, not by peace conferences, 
not by the realization of socialistic programmes, not by 
victories or defeats on land or sea, not by libraries or 
universities, nor by those futile mental exercises which 
are now called science ; but only by there being more 
and more of those simple men who, like the Dukhobors, 
Drojjin, Olkhovik in Russia, the Nazarenes in Austria, 
Condatier in France, Tervey in Holland, and others, 
having placed as their object not external alterations of 
life, but the closest fulfillment in themselves of the will 
of Him who has sent them into life, will direct all their 
powers to this realization. Only such people realizing 
the Kingdom of God in themselves, in their souls, will 
establish, without directly aiming at this purpose, that 
external Kingdom of God which every human soul is 
longing for. 

Salvation will come to pass only in this one way, and 
not in any other. Therefore what is now being done by 
those who, ruling men, inspire them with religious and 
patriotic superstitions, exciting in them exclusiveness, 
hatred and murder, as well as by those who, for the pur- 
pose of freeing men from slavery and oppression, invoke 
them to violent external revolution, or think that the 
acquisition by men of very much incidental, and for the 
most part unnecessary, information will of itself bring 
them to a good life, — all this, by distracting men from 
what alone they need, only removes them further from 
the possibility of salvation. 

The evil from which the men of the Christian world 
suffer is that they have temporarily lost religion. 

Some people, having come to see the discord between 
the existing religion and the degree of mental and scien- 
tific development attained by humanity at the present 
time, have decided that in general no religion whatever 
is necessary. They live without religion, and preach the 
uselessness of any religion of whatever kind. Others, 
holding to that distorted form of the Christian religion 
which is now preached, likewise live without religion, 
professing empty external forms, which cannot serve as 
guidance for men. 

Yet a religion which answers to the demands of our 
time does exist and is known to all men, and in a latent 
state lives in the hearts of men of the Christian world. 



Therefore, that this religion should become evident to 
and binding upon all men, it is only necessary that edu- 
cated men, the leaders of the masses, should understand 
that religion is necessary to man, that without religion 
men cannot live a good life, and that what they call 
science cannot replace religion ; and that those in power 
and who support the old empty forms of religion should 
understand that what they support and preach under the 
form of religion is not only not religion, but is the chief 
obstacle to men's appropriating the true religion which 
they already know, and which can alone deliver them 
from their calamities. So that the only certain means of 
man's salvation consists merely in ceasing to do that 
which hinders men from assimilating the true religion 
which already lives in their consciousness. 

XI 

THE SLAUGHTER AND CRIMES OF THE PRESENT WAR 

I had finished this article when news came of the de- 
struction of six hundred innocent lives opposite Port 
Arthur. It would seem that the useless suffering and 
death of these unfortunate, deluded men, who have need- 
lessly and so dreadfully perished, ought to disabuse 
those who were the cause of this destruction. I am not 
alluding to Makaroff and other officers; all these men 
knew what they were doing, and wherefore, and they 
voluntarily, for personal advantage, for ambition, did as 
they did, disguising themselves in pretended patriotism, 
a pretense not condemned merely because it is universal. 
I allude, rather, to those unfortunate men drawn from 
all parts of Russia, who, by the help of religious fraud, 
and under fear of punishment, have been torn from an 
honest, reasonable, useful, laborious family life, driven 
to the other end of the world, placed on a cruel, sense- 
less machine for slaughter, and torn to bits, drowned 
along with this stupid machine in a distant sea, without 
any need or any possibility of advantage from all their 
privations, efforts and sufferings, or from the death 
which overtook them. 

In 1830, during the Polish war, the adjutant Vili- 
jinsky, sent to St. Petersburg by Klopitsky, in a con- 
versation held in French with Dibitch, in answer to the 
latter's demand that the Russian troops should enter 
Poland, said to him : 

"Monsieur le Marechal, I think that in that case it 
will be quite impossible for the Polish nation to accept 
this manifesto. . . . 

" Believe me, the Emperor will make no further con- 
cessions. 

" Then I foresee that, unhappily, there will be war, 
that much blood will be shed, there will be many un- 
fortunate victims." 

" Do not think so ; at most there will be ten thousand 
who will perish on both sides, and that is all,"* said 
Dibitch in his German accent, quite confident that he, to- 
gether with another man as cruel and foreign to Russian 
and Polish life as he was himself, Nicholas I., had the 
right to condemn or not to condemn to death ten or a 
hundred thousand Russians and Poles. 

One hardly believes that this could have been, so 

*Vilijinskyadds on his own behalf: "The Field-Marshal did not then 
think that more than sixty thousand Russians alone would perish in this 
war, not so much from the enemy's fire as from disease, nor that he would 
himself be amongst their number." 



172 



THE ADVOCATE OF PEACE. 



September, 



senseless and dreadful is it, and yet it was ; sixty thou- 
sand maintainers of their families lost their lives owing 
to the will of those men. And now the same thing is 
taking place. 

In order not to let the Japanese into Manchuria, and 
to expel them from Korea, not ten thousand but fifty 
and more thousands will, according to all probability, 
be necessary. I do not know whether Nicholas II. and 
Kuropatkin say like Dibitch, in so many words, that 
not more than fifty thousand lives will be necessary for 
this on the Russian side alone, and only that; but they 
think it, they cannot but think it, because the work they 
are doing speaks for itself. That ceaseless stream of un- 
fortunate, deluded Russian peasants now being trans- 
ported by thousands to the Far East, these are those 
same not more than fifty thousand live Russian men 
whom Nicholas Romanoff, and Alexis Kuropatkin have 
decided they may get killed and who will be killed in 
support of those stupidities, robberies, and every kind of 
abomination which were accomplished in China and 
Korea by immoral ambitious men now sitting peacefully 
in their palaces and expecting new glory and new advan- 
tage and profit from the slaughter of these fifty thousand 
unfortunate defrauded Russian workingmen guilty of 
nothing and gaining nothing by their sufferings and 
death. For other people's land, to which the Russians 
have no right, which has been criminally seized from its 
legitimate owners, and which, in reality, is not even 
necessary to the Russians, and also for certain dark deal- 
ings by speculators, who in Korea wished to gain money 
out of other people's forests, many millions of money 
are spent, that is, a great part of the labor of the whole 
of the Russian people, while the future generations of 
this people are bound by debts, its best workmen are 
withdrawn from labor, and scores of thousands of its 
sons are mercilessly doomed to death. And the de- 
struction of these unfortunate men is already begun. 
More than this : the war is being managed by those who 
have hatched it so badly, so negligently, all is so unex- 
pected, so unprepared, that, as one paper admits, Rus- 
sia's chief chance of success lies in the fact that it 
possesses inexhaustible human material. It is upon this 
that rely those who send to death scores of thousands of 
Russian men ! 

It is frankly said that the regrettable reverses of our 
fleet must be compensated on the land. In plain lan- 
guage this means that if the authorities have badly 
directed things on sea, and by their negligence have 
destroyed not only the nation's millions but thousands of 
lives, we can make it up by condemning to death on 
land several more scores of thousands ! 

When crawling locusts cross rivers, it happens that 
the lower layers are drowned, until, from the bodies of 
the drowned, is formed a bridge over which the upper 
ranks can pass. In the same way are the Russian people 
being disposed of. 

Thus the first lower layer is already beginning to 
drown, indicating the way to other thousands, who will 
all likewise perish. 

And are the originators, directors and supporters of 
this dreadful work beginning to understand their sin, 
their crime? Not in the least. They are quite per- 
suaded that they have fulfilled, and are fulfilling, their 
duty, and they are proud of their activity. 



People speak of the loss of the brave Makaroff who, 
as all agree, was able to kill men very cleverly; they 
deplore the loss of a drowned excellent machine of 
slaughter which had cost so many millions of roubles ; 
they discuss the question of how to find another mur- 
derer as capable as the poor benighted Makaroff ; they 
invent new, still more efficacious tools of slaughter, and 
all the guilty men engaged in this dreadful work, from 
the Czar to the humblest journalist, all with one voice 
call for new insanities, new cruelties, for the increase of 
brutality and hatred of one's fellow- men. 

" Makaroff is not the only man in Russia, and every 
admiral placed in his position will follow in his steps, 
and will continue the plan and the idea of Makaroff, who 
has nobly perished in the strife," writes the Novoe 
Vreniya. 

" Let us earnestly pray God for those who have laid 
down their lives for the sacred Fatherland, without 
doubting for one moment that it, the Fatherland, will 
give us new sons, equally virtuous, for the further strug- 
gle, and will find in them an inexhaustible store of 
strength for a worthy completion of the work," writes the 
St. Petersburg Viedomosti. 

"A ripe nation will draw no other conclusion from the 
defeat, however unprecedented, than that we should 
continue, develop and conclude the strife ; therefore, let 
us find in ourselves new strength; new heroes of the spirit 
will arise," writes the Huss, and so forth. 

So murder and every kind of crime go on with greater 
fury. People enthusiastically admire the martial spirit 
of the volunteers who, having come unexpectedly upon 
fifty of their fellow-men, slay all of them, or take posses- 
sion of a village and slaughter all its population, or hang 
or shoot those accused of being spies, that is, of doing 
the very same thing which is regarded as indispensable, 
and is constantly done on our side. News about these 
crimes is reported in pompous telegrams to their chief 
director, the Czar, who, in return, sends to his virtuous 
troops his blessing on the continuation of such deeds. 

Is it not evident that if there be a salvation from this 
position, it is only one, that one which Jesus teaches? 
" Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteous- 
ness (that which is within you), and all the rest, that is, 
all that practical welfare toward which man is striving, 
will of itself be realized." 

Such is the law of life ; practical welfare is attained, 
not when man strives towards this practical welfare, such 
striving, on the contrary, for the most part, removes man 
from the attainment of what he seeks; but only when 
man, without thinking of the attainment of practical 
welfare, strives toward the most perfect fulfillment of 
that which before God, before the Source and Law of 
his life, he regards as right. Then only, incidentally, is 
practical welfare also attained. 

So that the true salvation of men is only one — the ful- 
fillment of the will of God by each individual man 
within himself, that is, in that portion of the universe 
which alone is subject to his power. In this is the chief, 
the only, destination of every individual man, and at the 
same time this is the only means by which every individ- 
ual man can influence others, and, therefore, to this, and 
to this only, should all the efforts of every man be 
directed. 

May 2, 1904. 



1904. 



THE ADVOCATE OF PEACE. 



173 



XII. 



NEW AND NBWBE VICTIMS. 



I had only just despatched the last of the preceding 
pages of this article when the dreadful news came of a 
new iniquity committed in regard to the Russian people 
by those light-minded men who, crazed with power, 
have appropriated the right of managing them. Again 
coarse and servile slaves of slaves, dressed up in various 
dazzling attires, varieties of generals wishing to dis- 
tinguish themselves or to do a bad turn to each other, 
or to earn the right to add one more little star, fingle- 
fangle, or scrap of ribbon to their idiotic glaring get-up, 
or else from stupidity or carelessness, — again these 
miserable, worthless men have destroyed amid dreadful 
sufferings thousands of those honorable, kind, hard- 
working laborers who feed them. And again this in- 
iquity not only does not cause those responsible for it to 
reflect and repent, but one hears and reads only about 
its being necessary as speedily as possible to mutilate 
and slaughter a greater number of men, and to ruin still 
more families, both Russian and Japanese. 

More than this, to prepare men for fresh iniquities of 
this kind, the perpetrators of these crimes, far from 
recognizing what is evident to all, namely, that for the 
Russians this event, even from their patriotic military 
point of view, was a scandalous defeat, endeavor to as- 
sure credulous people that these unfortunate Russian 
laboring men, lured into a trap like cattle into a slaughter- 
house, of whom several thousands have been killed and 
maimed merely because one general did not understand 
what another general had said, have performed an act 
of heroism because those who could not run away were 
killed and those who did run away remained alive. As 
to the fact that one of these terrible immoral and cruel 
men, distinguished by the titles of Generals, Admirals, 
drowned a quantity of peaceful Japanese, this is also 
described as a great and glorious act of heroism, which 
must gladden the hearts of Russians. And in all the 
papers are reprinted this awful appeal to murder: 

" Let the two thousand Russian soldiers killed on the 
Yalu, together with the maimed Retvisan and her sister 
ships, with our lost torpedo-boats, teach our cruisers 
with what devastation they must break in upon the shores 
of base Japan. She has sent her soldiers to shed Russian 
blood, and no quarter should be afforded her. Now one 
cannot — it is sinful — be sentimental; we must fight, 
we must direct such heavy blows that the memory of 
them shall freeze the treacherous hearts of the Japanese. 
Now is the time for the cruisers to go out to sea to reduce 
to ashes the towns of Japan, flying as a dreadful calamity, 
along its beautiful shores. No more sentimentality." 

The frightful work commenced is continued. Loot, 
violence, murder, hypocrisy, theft, and, above all, the 
most fearful fraud, the distortion of religious teachings, 
both Christian and Buddhistic, continue. 

The Czar, the chief responsible person, continues to re- 
view the troops, to thank, reward and encourage them ; 
he. issues an edict for the calling out of the reserves ; 
his faithful subjects again and again lay down their 
property and lives at the feet of him they call, only with 
their lips, their adored Monarch. On the other hand, 
desiring to distinguish themselves before each other in 
deeds and not in words only, they tear away the fathers 



and the bread-winners from their orphaned families, pre- 
paring them for slaughter. The worse the position of 
Russia the more recklessly do the journalists lie, trans- 
forming shameful defeats into victories, knowing that no 
one will contradict them, and they quietly collect money 
from subscriptions and sales. The more money and 
labor of the people is devoted to the war, the more is 
grabbed by various authorities and speculators who know 
that no one will convict them because every one is doing 
the same. The military, trained for murder, having 
passed years in a school of inhumanity, coarseness, and 
idleness, rejoice, poor men, because, besides an increase 
of their salary, the slaughter of superiors opens vacancies 
for their promotion. Christian pastors continue to in- 
vite men to the greatest of crimes, continue to commit 
sacrilege, praying God to help the work of war, and instead 
of condemning, they justify and praise that pastor who, 
with the cross in his hands on the very scene of murder, 
encouraged men to the crime. The same thing is going 
on in Japan. The benighted Japanese go in for murder 
with yet greater fervor, owing to their victories; the 
Mikado also reviews and rewards his troops; various 
generals boast of their bravery, imagining that having 
learned to kill they have acquired enlightenment. So, 
too, groan the unfortunate working people torn from 
useful labor and from their families. So, the journalists 
lie and rejoice over their gains.- Also probably, — for 
where murder is elevated into virtue every kind of vice 
is bound to flourish, — also probably all kinds of com- 
manders and speculators earn money, and Japanese theo- 
logians and religious teachers no less than the military 
in the techniques of armaments do not remain behind 
the Europeans in the techniques of religious deceit and 
sacrilege, but distort the great Buddhist teaching by not 
only permitting but justifying that murder which Buddha 
forbade. The Buddhistic scientist Soyen-Shaku, ruling 
over eight hundred monasteries, explains that although 
Buddha forbade manslaughter he also said he could 
never be at peace until all beings are united in the in- 
finitely loving heart of all things, and that, therefore, 
in order to bring into harmony that which is discordant 
it is necessary to fight and to kill men.* 

It is as if there never had existed the Christian and 
Buddhistic teaching about the unity of the human spirit, 
the brotherhood of men, love, compassion, the sacredness 
of human life. Men, both Japanese and Russians, already 
enlightened by the truth, yet like wild animals, nay, 

* In this article it is said : — 

" This triple world is my own possession. All the things therein are 
my own children . . . the ten thousand things in this world are no more 
than the reflections of my own self. They come from the one source. 
They partake of the one body. Therefore I cannot rest quite until every 
being, even the smallest possible fragment of existence, is settled down 
to its proper appointment." 

. . . This is the position taken by the Buddha, and we, his humble fol- 
lowers, are but to walk in his wake. 

Why, then, do we fight at all ? 

Because we do not And this world as it ought to be. Because there are 
here so many perverted creatures, so many wayward thoughts, so many 
ill-directed hearts, due to ignorant subjectivity. For this reason Bud- 
dhists are never tired of combating all productions of ignorance, and 
their fight must be to the bitter end. They will show no quarter. They 
will mercilessly destroy the very root from which arises the misery of this 
life. To accomplish this end, they will never be afraid of sacrificing 
their lives. . . . 

There follow, just as is nsual with us, entangled arguments about self- 
sacrifice and kindness, about the transmigration of souls and about much 
else — all this for the sole purpose of concealing the simple and clear 
commandment of Buddha, not to kill. 

Further it is said : " The hand that is raised to strike and the eye that 
is fixed to take aim do not belong to the individual, but are the instru- 
ments utilized by a principle higher than transient existence." 

(" The Open Court," May, 1904. " Buddhist Views of War," by the 
Right Kev. Soyen-Shaku.) 



174 



THE ADVOCATE OF PEACE. 



September, 



worse than wild animals, throw themselves upon each 
other with the sole desire to destroy as many lives as 
possible. Thousands of unfortunates groan and writhe 
in cruel sufferings and die in agony in Japanese and 
Russian field hospitals, asking themselves in bewilder- 
ment why this fearful thing was done with them, while 
other thousands are already rotting in the earth or on 
the earth or floating in the sea, in swollen decomposition. 
And scores of thousands of wives, fathers, mothers, 
children, are bemoaning their bread-winners, uselessly 
destroyed. Yet all this is still too little ; new and newer 
victims are being prepared. The chief concern of the 
Russian organizers of slaughter is that on the Russian 
side the stream of food for cannon, three thousand men 
per day doomed to destruction, should not be interrupted 
for one minute. The Japanese are preoccupied with the 
same thing. The locusts are incessantly being driven 
down into the river in order that the rows behind may 
pass over the bodies. 

When will this cease, and the deceived people at last 
recover themselves and say : " Well, go you yourselves, 
you heartless Czars, Mikados, ministers, bishops, priests, 
generals, editors, speculators, or however you may be 
called, go you yourselves under these shells and bullets, 
but we do not wish to go and we will not go." 

"Leave us in peace, to plough, and sow, and build, 
and also feed you, you sluggards." It would be so 
natural to say this now, when amongst us in Russia re- 
sounds the weeping and wailing of hundreds of thousands 
of mothers, wives and children, from whom are being 
snatched away their bread-earners, the so-called " reserve." 
These same men, the majority of the reserve are able to 
read ; they know what the Far East is, they know that 
war is going on, not for anything which is in the least 
necessary to Russia, but for some dealings in strange 
land, leased lands, as they themselves call them, on 
which it seemed advantageous to some corrupt specu- 
lators to build railways and so gain profit ; also they know, 
or might know, that they will be killed like sheep in a 
slaughter-house, since the Japanese possess the latest 
improvements in tools of murder which we do not, as the 
Russian authorities who are sending these people to 
death had not thought in time of furnishing themselves 
with the same weapons as the Japanese. Knowing all 
this, it would indeed be so natural to say, "Go you, 
those who have brought on this work, all you to whom 
war is necessary, and who justify it ; go you, and face 
the Japanese bullets and mines, but we will not go, 
because we not only do not need to do this, but we cannot 
understand how it can be necessary to any one." 

But no, they do not say this ; they go, and they will 
continue to go; they cannot but go as'long as they fear 
that which ruins the body and not that which ruins both 
the body and the soul. 

" Whether we shall be killed," they argue, " or maimed 
in these chinnampos, or whatever they are called, whither 
we are driven, we do not know ; it yet may happen that 
we shall get through safely, and, moreover, with rewards 
and glory like those sailors who are now being feasted 
all over Russia because the Japanese bombs and bullets 
did not hit them, but somebody else ; whereas, should we 
refuse we should be certainly sent to prison, starved, 
beaten, exiled to the province of Yakoutsk, perhaps even 
killed immediately." So with despair in their hearts, 



leaving behind a good rational life, leaving their wives 
and their children, they go. 

Yesterday I met a Reservist soldier accompanied by his 
mother and wife. All three were riding in a cart; he 
had had a drop too much ; his wife's face was swollen 
with tears. He turned to me : 

" Goodbye to thee, Lyof Nikolaevitch, off to the Far 
East." 

" Well, art thou going to fight ? " 
" Well, some one has to fight ! " 
"No one need fight ! " 

He reflected for a moment. " But what is one to do, 
where can one escape ? " 

I saw that he had understood me, had understood that 
the work to which he was being sent was an evil work. 

" Where can one escape ? " That is the precise ex- 
pression of that mental condition, which in the official 
and journalistic world is translated into the words, " For 
the Faith, the Czar, and the B'atherland." Those who 
abandoning their hungry families go to suffering, to 
death, say as they feel, "Where can one escape?" 
Whereas, those who sit in safety in their luxurious pal- 
aces say that all Russian men are ready to sacrifice their 
lives for their adored monarch, and for the glory and 
greatness of Russia. 

Yesterday, from a peasant I know, I received two 
letters, one after the other. 
This is the first : 

" Dear Lyof Nikolaevitoh : Well, to-day I have re- 
ceived the official announcement of my call to the service ; 
to-morrow I must present myself at the headquarters. 
That is all. And after that, to the Far East to meet the 
Japanese bullets. 

" About my own and my household's grief I will not 
tell you; it is not you who will fail to understand all 
the horror of my position and the horrors of war ; all 
this you have long ago painfully realized, and you under- 
stand it all. How I have longed to visit you, to have a 
talk with you! I had written to you a long letter in 
which I described the torments of my soul, but I had 
not had time to copy it when I received my summons. 
What is my wife to do now with her four children ? As 
an old man, of course, you cannot do anything yourself 
for my folks, but you might ask some of your friends in 
their leisure to visit my orphaned family. I beg you 
earnestly that if my wife proves unable to bear the agony 
of her helplessness with her burden of children and 
makes up her mind to go to you for help and counsel, 
you will receive and console her. Although she does 
not know you personally she believes in your word, and 
that means much. 

" I was not able to resist the summons, but I say 
beforehand that through me not one Japanese family 
shall be orphaned. My God ! how dreadful is all this, 
how distressing and painful to abandon all by which one 
lives and in which one is concerned ! " 
The second letter is as follows : 

" Kindest Lyof Nikolaevitch : Only one day of actual 
service has passed, and I have already lived through an 
eternity of most desperate torments. From eight o'clock in 
the morning till nine in the evening we have been crowded 
and knocked about to and fro in the barrack yard, like a 
herd of cattle ; the comedy of medical examination was 
three times repeated, and those who had reported them- 



1904. 



THE ADVOCATE OF PEACE. 



175 



selves ill did not receive even ten minutes' attention 
before they were marked ' Satisfactory.' When we, 
these two thousand satisfactory individuals, were driven 
from the military commander to the barracks, along the 
road spread out for almost a verst stood a crowd of 
relatives, mothers, and wives with infants in arms, and if 
you had only heard and seen how they clasped their 
fathers, husbands, sons, and hanging round their necks 
wailed hopelessly! Generally I behave in a reserved 
way and can restrain my feelings, but I could not hold 
out, and I also wept." (In journalistic language this 
same is expressed thus : " The upheaval of patriotic feel- 
ing is immense.") 

" Where is the standard that can measure all this 
immensity of woe now spreading itself over almost one- 
third of the world ? And we, we are now that food for 
cannon, which in the near future will be offered as sacri- 
fice to the God of vengeance and horror. 

" I cannot manage to establish my inner balance. 
Oh ! how I execrate myself for this double-mindedness 
which prevents my serving one Master and God." 

This man does not yet sufficiently believe that what 
destroys the body is not dreadful, but that which destroys 
both the body and the soul : therefore he cannot refuse 
to go ; yet while leaving his own family he promises 
beforehand that through him not one Japanese family 
shall be orphaned ; he believes in the chief law of God, 
the law of all religions, to act toward others as one wishes 
others to act toward oneself. Of such men more or less 
consciously recognizing this law there are in our time, 
not in the Christian world alone, but in the Buddhistic, 
Mohammedan, Confucian, and Brahminic world, not only 
thousands but millions. 

There exist true heroes, not those who are now being 
f£ted because, having wished to kill others, they were 
not killed themselves, but true heroes who are now con- 
fined in prisons and in the province of Yakoutsk for 
having categorically refused to enter the ranks of mur- 
derers, and who have preferred martyrdom to this de- 
parture from the law of Jesus. There are also such as 
he who writes to me, who go, but who will not kill. 
But also that majority which goes without thinking, and 
endeavors not to think of what it is doing, still in the 
depth of its soul does now already feel that it is doing 
an evil deed by obeying authorities who t«ar men from 
labor and from their families, and send them to needless 
slaughter of men, repugnant to their soul and their faith ; 
and they go only because they are so entangled on all 
sides that — "Where can one escape?" 

Meanwhile, those who remain at home not only feel 
this but know and express it. Yesterday in the high 
road I met some peasants returning from Toula. One 
of them was reading a leaflet as he walked by the side 
of his cart. 

I asked, " What is that, a telegram ? " 

" This is yesterday's, but here is one of to-day." 

He took another out of his pocket. We stopped. I 
read it. 

" You should have seen what took place yesterday at 
the station," he said, " it was dreadful." 

" Wives, children, more than a thousand of them, 
weeping. They surrounded the train, but were allowed 
no further. Strangers wept, looking on. One woman 
from Toula gasped and fell down dead; five children. 



They have since been placed in various institutions, but 
the father was driven away all the same. . . . What do 
we want with this Manchuria, or whatever it is called. 
There is sufficient land here. And what a lot of people 
and of property has been destroyed." 

Yes, the relation of men to war is now quite different 
from that which formerly existed even so lately as the 
year '77. That which is now taking place never took 
place before. 

The papers set forth that, during the receptions of the 
Czar, who is traveling about Russia for the purpose of 
hypnotizing the men who are being sent to murder, in- 
describable enthusiasm is manifested amongst the people. 
As a matter of fact something quite different is being 
manifested. From all sides one hears reports that in 
one place three Reservists have hanged themselves ; in 
another spot two more ; in yet another about a woman 
whose husband had been taken away bringing her children 
to the conscription committee-room and leaving them 
there ; while another hanged herself in the yard of the 
military commander. All are dissatisfied, gloomy, ex- 
asperated. The words, " For the Faith, the King, and 
the Fatherland," the National Anthem, and shouts of 
" Hurrah " no longer act upon people as they once did. 
Another warfare of a different kind, the struggling con- 
sciousness of the deceit and sinfulness of the work to 
which people are being called, is more and more taking 
possession of the people. 

Yes, the great strife of our time is not that now taking 
place between the Japanese and the Russians, nor that 
which may blaze up between the white and yellow races, 
not that strife which is carried on by mines, bombs, bul- 
lets, but that spiritual strife, which without ceasing has 
gone on and is now going- on between the enlightened 
consciousness of mankind now waiting for manifestation 
and that darkness and that burden which surrounds and 
oppresses mankind. 

In His own time Jesus yearned in expectation, and 
said : " I came to cast fire upon the earth, and how I wish 
that it were already kindled." Luke 12 : 49. 

That which Jesus longed for is being accomplished, 
the fire is being kindled. Then do not let us check it, 
but let us spread and serve it. 

13 May, 1904. 

REJOICING AT THE WHOLESALE DESTRUCTION OF LIVES. 

I should never finish this article if I were to continue 
to add to it all that corroborates its essential idea. 
Yesterday the news came in of the sinking of the 
Japanese ironclads, and in the so-called higher circles 
of Russian fashionable, rich, intellectual society they 
are, without the slightest conscientious scruples, rejoic- 
ing at the destruction of a thousand human lives. Yet 
to-day I have received from a simple seaman, a man 
standing on the lowest plane of society, the following 
letter : * 

Letter from sailor (there follows his Christian name, 
father's name and surname). 

" Much respected Lyof Nikolaevitch, I greet you with 
a low bow, with love, much respected Lyof Nikolae- 
vitch. 

" I have read your book. It was very pleasant read- 

*The letter is written in a most illiterate way, filled with mistakes 
in orthography and punctuation. (Trans. ) 



176 



THE ADVOCATE OF PEACE. 



September, 



ing for me. I have been a great lover of reading your 
works. Well, Lyof Nikolaevitch, we are now in a state 
of war; please write to me whether it is agreeable to 
God or not that our commanders compel us to kill. I 
beg you, Lyof Nikolaevitch, write to me please whether 
or not the truth now exists on earth. Tell me, Lyof 
Nikolaevitch. In church here a prayer is being read, 
the priest mentions the Christ-loving army. Is it true 
or not that God loves-war ? I pray you, Lyof Nikolaevitch, 
have you got any books from which I could see whether 
truth exists on earth or not. Send me such books. 
What they cost, I will pay. I beg you, Lyof Nikolaevitch, 
do not neglect my request. If there are no books, then 
send me a letter. I will be very glad when I receive a 
letter from you. I will await your letter with impatience. 
Good-by for the present. I remain alive and well, and 
wish the same to you from the Lord God. Good health 
and good success in your work." 

There follows the address, Port Arthur, the name of 
the ship on which the correspondent serves, his rank 
and his name. 

In a direct way, in words, I cannot answer this dear, 
serious and truly enlightened man. He is in Port Arthur, 
with which there no longer is any communication either 
by letter or telegraph. But we still have a mutual means 
of communication. This means is that God in whom we 
both believe and concerning whom we both know that 
war is not according to His will. The doubt which has 
arisen in his soul contains at the same time its own solu- 
tion. And this doubt has now arisen and is living in 
the souls of thousands and thousands of men, not only 
Russians and not only Japanese, but all those unfortu- 
nate people who are compelled by violence to fulfill the 
act most repellent to human nature. 

The hypnotism by which people have been stupefied 
and by which governments still endeavor to stupefy 
them soon passes off, and its effect is becoming weaker 
and weaker ; whereas the doubt as to " whether or not 
it be agreeable to God that our commanders compel us 
to kill " grows stronger and stronger, cannot in any way 
be extinguished, and keeps spreading further and further. 

The doubt as to " whether or not it be agreeable to 
God that our commanders compal us to kill " — this is a 
spark of that fire which Jesus kindled upon earth and 
which is beginning to spread. To know and feel this is 
a great joy. 

Leo Tolstoy. 

Yasnaya Poliana, May 21, 1904. 



The Peace Cause at the Women's 
International Council in Berlin. 

Statement by Mrs. May Wright Sewall, President of 
the Council. 

Mrs. May Wright Sewall, who was the president of 
the International Council of Women at its recent great 
meeting in Berlin, has returned to America, and from 
her home in Indianapolis writes to the Woman's Journal 
an account of the Peace Evening at the Berlin Congress, 
which she pronounces one of the most impressive occa- 
sions in her experience. Mrs. Sewall is chairman of the 
International Peace Committee of the Council. She is 
also a member of the Executive Committee of the Inter- 



national Peace Congress which is to meet in Boston in 
October, and is working for the largest possible repre- 
sentation of the women of the country at the Congress. 
At Berlin she did much to stimulate European interest 
in the Congress and in the whole cause of peace and 
arbitration. She gives for publication the following 
account of the action of the women at Berlin in this 
matter : 

" During the recent quinquennial of the International 
Council at Berlin its Peace Committee held six sessions. 
As its acting chairman, I invited all the members of the 
Council executives from all countries, who were not 
members of the standing committees on peace or laws 
concerning domestic relations, to meet with the members 
of the Peace Committee. This meeting was held on the 
evening of Monday, June 6, and proved to be a very 
stimulating conference. Seventeen of the nineteen 
countries now having organized National Councils were 
represented by from one to six members of their repre- 
sentative National Council workers. Each country in 
turn was invited to give a resume of its situation so far 
as matters of peace, war, arbitration, armaments, etc., 
were concerned. 

- " Mrs. Dixon of New South Wales told the story of a 
country which for one hundred years had neither army 
nor navy. The first cannon made in New South Wales 
was manufactured when Great Britain called upon her 
colonies for help in the Boer war. Mrs. Dixon said that 
war was popular in New South Wales; that all the 
young men wanted to go ; and now she said that the 
presence of war in Asia made New South Wales feel 
the necessity of being able to defend its coast. It was 
evident that all the British colonies felt that the Boer 
war had given them an opportunity to prove their loyalty. 
It is pitiful that, at this stage of civilization, the killing 
of a perfect stranger, toward whom one can have no 
rational feeling of animosity, or the exposing of oneself to 
be slain by such a stranger, is regarded, by highly edu- 
cated people, as a final proof of loyalty and the finest 
exhibition of patriotism. The delegates representing 
Great Britain itself told of the antagonism that had been 
excited by the suggestion of a member of the British 
government to introduce the conscription system. The 
presentation of the attitude of various classes of English- 
men toward this proposition was one of the chief features 
of interest at the conference. 

" Mrs. Sherriff-Bain of New Zealand reported that the 
result of the Boer war in her country had been to make 
military drill an almost universal part of public school 
education, and that many women teachers give the boys 
instruction in the use of arms and superintend the drills. 
She reported that to many of the women this was very 
obnoxious, and that consultation had been held regarding 
what action should be taken if a willingness to take 
charge of the military drills of the boys should come to 
be a legal requirement of women teachers. Personally 
I felt some gratification in the reflection that in New 
Zealand 'the ballot and the bullet' would be going 
together at least. Whatever incongruities there would 
be in refined women, engaged in what is supposed to be 
the most civilizing of professions (teaching), drilling 
boys in the use of swords and muskets, it would cer- 
tainly be less galling to an enfranchised woman than the 
same requirement would be to a disfranchised one. It 



