341,67 S41p 58-15098 1^50 
Schweitzer, Albert, 1875- 

Peace or atomic war? [Three 
appeals broadcast from Oslo, 

" 



341,67 S41p 56-15098 $i & 50 
Schweitaer, Albert, 1875- 

Peace or atomic war? [Three 
appeals broadcast from Oslo^ 
Norway, on April 28, 29 ? and 
30, 1958. Holt [1958] 

p * Social Science 




KANSAS CITY, MO PUBLIC LIBRARY 



D DDDI 03123112 2 



eace 
or 



Atomic War? 



Three appeals broadcast from Oslo, Norway, 
on April 28, 29, and 30, 1958 




eace 








ALBERT SCHWEITZER 



HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY NEW YORK 



Copyright 1958 by Albert Schweitzer 

All rights reserved, including the right to repro- 
duce this book or portions thereof in any form 

In Canada, George J. McLeod, Ltd. 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 58-13223 

FIRST EDITION 



87757-0218 
Printed in the United States of America 



denunciation of t luctear 



IN APRIL of 1957, I raised my voice, together with 
others, to draw attention to the great danger of radio- 
active poisoning of the air and the earth, following tests 
with atom (uranium) bombs and hydrogen bombs. 
With others I appealed to the nuclear powers to come 
to an agreement to stop the tests as soon as possible, 
while declaring their genuine desire to renounce the 
use of atomic weapons. 

At the time there was reasonable hope that this step 
would be taken. It was not to be. The 1957 negotiations 
in London that summer, led by Mr. Harold Stassen of 
the United States, achieved nothing. The conference 
arranged by the United Nations in the autumn of that 
year suffered the same fate through the withdrawal of 
the Soviet Union from the discussions. 

The Soviet Union has recently made a disarmament 
proposal on the basis of which discussions are appar- 
ently being planned. As a first step the plan presupposes 
that nuclear tests should cease immediately. 

What chances has this condition of being fulfilled? 

It might be thought that it would be easy for all those 
involved to reach agreement on this point. None of 

9 



10 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

them would have to sacrifice any of the atomic weapons 
in their possession, while the handicap of not being 
able to try out new ones would be the same for all. 

Even so, the proposal is difficult for the United States 
and Britain to accept. They spoke against it when the 
matter was discussed in the spring of 1957. Since then 
ceaseless propaganda has claimed that the radiation 
following nuclear tests is so dangerous that it is neces- 
sary to stop them. The American and European press 
is constantly receiving abundant propaganda material 
supplied by government atomic commissions and 
scientists who feel called upon to support this view. 

From a statement issued by the subcommittee of the 
American Atomic Energy Commission, I quote the 
following phrases: 

Within the framework of scientific and military 
requirements, it is advisable that nuclear tests are 
limited to a minimum. The necessary steps should 
be taken to correct the present confusion of the 
general public. The present and potential effects 
on heredity from the gradual increase in radio- 
activity of the air are kept within tolerable limits. 
The possibility of a harmful effect which people 
believe to be beyond control, has a strong emo- 
tional effect. The continuation of nuclear tests is 
necessary and justified in the interests of national 
security. 

What is meant by "the confusion of the public" is the 



The Renunciation of Nuclear Tests 11 

fact that people are becoming increasingly aware of 
dangers resulting from nuclear tests. 

The probable reasoning behind the obscure state- 
ment that the "effects on heredity from the gradual 
increase in radioactivity of the air are kept within toler- 
able limits" is that the number of children who will be 
born deformed as a result of the harm done to the 
sexual cells supposedly will not be large enough to 
justify the stopping of the tests. 

The view of the scientists who feel called upon to 
reduce the danger of radioactivity to what they be- 
lieve to be its right proportions is expressed by a Central 
European scientist who concluded a speech on this 
subject with the following bold, prophetic words: 

If the tests are carried on with the same frequency 
as in the last few years, the radioactive poisoning 
will be four times stronger in 1983 than at present, 
and about six times stronger around the year 2010. 
Even that strength would be small compared with 
natural radiation. It can be stated categorically 
that the risk for mankind involved in nuclear tests 
is small. That is not to say that there is no risk. In 
this context I should like to quote the words of the 
American physicist and member of the Atomic 
Energy Commission, Dr. Libby: 'The risk of 
radioactive poisoning must be balanced against the 
risk to which the entire free world would be ex- 
posed if nuclear tests were abandoned before a 
safe international disarmament agreement has been 



12 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

brought about. The tests are necessary if the 
United States is not to be left behind in the 
development of nuclear weapons.' 

During the continued reassurance campaign a very 
prominent American nuclear physicist went to the 
length of declaring that the total number of luminous 
watch dials in the world represents a greater danger 
than the radioactive fall-out of nuclear tests up till now. 

The reassurance propaganda expects much from the 
glad tidings that science has succeeded in making the 
prototype of a hydrogen bomb producing far less of 
dangerous radioactive materials than the usual ones. 
The new bomb is called "the clean hydrogen bomb". 
The old type must from now on be content to be called 
the dirty bomb. 

The clean hydrogen bomb differs from the other in 
having a jacket made of a material which does not, like 
Uranium 238, release immense quantities of radioactive 
elements at the enormous explosive temperature. That 
is why it is less harmful as regards radioactivity. It is 
also, however, less powerful. 

The new, highly praised hydrogen bomb is let it be 
said in passing only relatively clean. Its trigger is a 
uranium bomb made of the fissionable Uranium 235 
an atomic bomb as powerful as the one dropped over 
Hiroshima. This bomb, when detonated, also produces 
radioactivity, as do the neutrons released in great 
numbers at the explosion. 

In an American newspaper at the beginning of this 



The Renunciation of Nuclear Tests 13 

year, Dr. Edward Teller, the father of the dirty hy- 
drogen bomb, sang a hymn of praise to the idyllic 
nuclear war to be waged with completely clean hy- 
drogen bombs. He insists on a continuation of the tests, 
to perfect this ideal bomb: "Further tests will put us 
in a position to fight our opponents' war machine, while 
sparing the innocent bystanders. Clean weapons of this 
kind will reduce unnecessary casualties in a future war/* 

Of course, neither the United States nor the Soviet 
Union is thinking of producing this less effective bomb 
for use in a possible war. The U. S. Department of 
Defense has quite recently declared that the irradiation 
of whole areas has become a new offensive weapon. 

The clean hydrogen bomb is intended for window 
display only, not for use. The bomb is to encourage 
people to believe that future nuclear tests will be 
followed by less and less radiation, and that there is no 
argument against the continuation of the tests. 



Those who think that the danger created by nuclear 
tests is small mainly take air radiation into considera- 
tion, persuading themselves that the danger limit has 
not yet been reached. 

The results of their arithmetic are, however, not so 
reliable as they would like to believe. Through the years 
the toleration limit for radiation had to be reduced 
several times. In 1934, it was 100 radiation units per 
year. At present the limit is officially put at five. In 
many countries it is even lower. Dr. Lauriston Taylor 



14 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

(U.S.A.), who is regarded as an authority on protec- 
tion against radiation, holds with others that it is an 
open question whether there is anything called a harm- 
less amount of radiation. He thinks that we can only 
speak of an amount of radiation which we regard as 
tolerable. 

We are constantly being told about "a permissible 
amount of radiation/' Who permitted it? Who has any 
right to permit it? 

When speaking about the risk of radiation we must 
take into consideration not only the radiation coining 
from the outside, but also that coming from radioactive 
elements in our body. 

What is the source of this radioactivity? 

The radioactive elements released in the air by 
nuclear tests do not stay there permanently. In the 
form of radioactive rain and radioactive snow they fall 
down on the earth. They enter the plants through leaves 
and roots and stay there. We absorb them through the 
plants by drinking milk from the cows or by eating the 
meat of animals which have fed on them. Radioactive 
ram infects our drinking water. 

The most powerful radioactive poisoning occurs in 
the areas between the Northern latitudes 10 and 60, 
because of the numerous nuclear tests conducted mainly 
in these latitudes by the Soviet Union and the United 
States. 

The radioactive elements absorbed over the years by 
our bodies are not evenly distributed in the cellular 
tissue, but are deposited and accumulated at certain 



The Renunciation of 'Nuclear Tests 15 

points. From these points the internal radiation takes 
place, causing injuries to particularly vulnerable organs. 
What this kind of radiation lacks in strength is made 
up for by its persistence, working as it does day and 
night for years. 

It is a well-known fact that one of the most wide- 
spread and dangerous elements absorbed by us is 
Strontium 9(X It is stored in the bones and from there 
emits its rays into cells of red bone marrow, where the 
red and white corpuscles are made. Blood diseases- 
fatal in most casesare the result. The cells of the 
reproductive organs are particularly sensitive to this 
element. Even relatively weak radiation may lead to 
fatal consequences. 

The most sinister aspect of both internal and external 
radiation is that years may pass before the evil con- 
sequences appear. Indeed, they make themselves felt, 
not in the first nor second generation, but in the follow- 
ing ones. Generation afteL.ggneration, for centuries to 
come, will witness the birth of an ever-increasing 
number of children with mental and physical defects. 

, ,, 11... , . , ^,, , ... M-JM*", m, -'* ,.-,,.' Jt if 

It is not for the physicist, choosing to take into 
account only the radiation from the air, to say the 
decisive word on the dangers of nuclear tests. That 
right belongs to the biologists and physicians who have 
studied internal as well as external radiation, and those 
physicists who pay attention to the facts estabHshed by 
the biologists and physicians. 

The declaration signed by 9,235 scientists of all 
nations, handed to the Secretary General of the United 



16 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

Nations by the renowned American scientist. Dr. 
Linus Pauling, on January 13, 1958, gave the reassur- 
ance propaganda its deathblow. The scientists declared 
that the radioactivity gradually created by nuclear tests 
represents a greater danger for all parts of the world 
and is particularly serious because its consequence will 
be an increasing number of deformed children in the 
future. For this reason they demanded an international 
agreement puting an end to the nuclear tests. 

Propaganda for the continuation of nuclear tests can 
no longer maintain that the scientists do not agree on 
the question of the danger of radiation, and that one 
must, therefore, await the decision of international 
bodies and abstain from alarming the public by saying 
that radiation represents an actual danger growing more 
serious every day. 

This propaganda will continue to set the tone in 
certain newspapers. But beside it the truth about the 
danger of nuclear tests marches imperturbably along, 
influencing an ever-increasing section of public opinion. 
In the long run, even the most efficiently organized 
propaganda can do nothing against the truth. 

One incomprehensible aspect of the propaganda for 
the continuation of nuclear tests is its complete dis- 
regard of their harmful effects on future generations 
which, according to biologists and physicians, will be 
the result of the radiation to which we are being 
exposed. 

The declaration signed by the 9,235 scientists did 
well in stressing the danger. 



The Renunciation of Nuclear Tests 17 

We must not be responsible for the future birth of 
thousands of children with the most serious mental and 
physical defects simply because we did not pay enough 
attention to that danger. Only those who have never 
been present at the birth of a deformed baby, never 
witnessed the despair of its mother, dare to maintain 
that the risk in going on with nuclear tests is one which 
must be taken under existing circumstances. The well- 
known French biologist and geneticist, Jean Rostand, 
calls the continuation of nuclear tests "le crime dans 
Tauenir" (the crime projected into the future). It is the 
particular duty of women to prevent this sin against the 
future. It is for them to raise their voices against it in 
such a way that they will be heard. 



It is strange that so far nobody has stressed that the 
question of whether nuclear tests should be stopped or 
continued is pot one which concerns the nuclear powers 
exclusively. Who is giving these countries the right to 
experiment, in time of peace, with weapons involving 
the most serious risks for the whole world? What has 
international law enthroned by the United Nations 
and so highly praised in our time to say on this matter? 
Does it no longer look out on the world from its ivory 
tower? Then it must be brought back into the world 
again so that it may face the facts and do its duty ac- 
cordingly. 

International law would at once discover the deplor- 
able case of Japan, which suffers heavily from the effects 



18 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

of nuclear tests. The radioactive clouds created by the 
Soviet tests in Northeast Siberia and by the American 
ones at Bikini in the Pacific Ocean are carried by the 
winds over Japan. The resulting radioactive poisoning 
is the worst possible. Very heavy radioactive rainfalls 
are quite common. The radioactive poisoning of the soil 
and the vegetation is so powerful that the inhabitants 
of various districts ought to abstain from using their 
harvest for food. But they have no alternative but to eat 
rice infected with strontium, an element particularly 
dangerous to children. The ocean surrounding Japan is 
also at times dangerously radioactive, and thereby the 
very food supply of the country in which fish has 
always played an important partis being threatened 
because of the large amount of radioactive fish unsuit- 
able for consumption. 

As every new nuclear test makes a bad situation 
worse, the Japanese Government, when hearing of plans 
for new tests to the north or south of Japan, has pre- 
sented its country's urgent appeal in Washington or 
Moscow, beseeching the American or Soviet authorities 
to give up their plans. The answer was always the same 
they regretted there could be no question of doing so 
while as yet the ^powers had not reached an agreement 
to that effect. As recently as February 20, 1958, this 
happened again in the capital of one of the nuclear 
powers. 

We always learn about such appeals and their refusal 
through short paragraphs in the newspaper just like 
any other news item. The press does not disturb us with 



The Renunciation of Nuclear Tests 19 

editorials drawing our attention to and making us 
share in what lies behind such news the misery of the 
Japanese people. Thus we and the press are guilty of a 
lack of compassion. More guilty however is international 
law, which has kept silent and indifferent on this ques- 
tion year after year. 

It is high time to realize that the question of con- 
tinuing or ceasing nuclear tests is an urgent matter for 
international law. Mankind is imperiled by the tests. 
Mankind insists that they stop, and has every right to 
do so. 

If there is left in the civilization of our times anything 
of living international law, or if it should be re-estab- 
lished, then the nations responsible for nuclear tests 
must renounce them immediately, without making this 
dependent on a disarmament agreement. This matter 
has nothing to do with disarmament. The nations in 
question will continue to keep those weapons which 
they now have. 

There is no time to lose. New tests increasing the 
danger must not be allowed to take place. It is impor- 
tant to realize that even without new tests the danger 
will increase during the coming years: a large part of 
the radioactive elements flung up in the atmosphere 
and stratosphere during the nuclear experiments is still 
there. It will come down only after several years, prob- 
ably about fifteen. 

The immediate renunciation of further tests will 
create a favorable atmosphere for talks on banning 
the use of nuclear weapons. When this urgently neces- 



20 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

sary step has been taken, such negotiations can take 
place in peace. 

That the Soviet Union is now willing to renounce 
further tests is of great importance. If Britain and the 
United States could bring themselves to the same rea- 
sonable decision demanded by international law, 
humanity would be liberated from the fear of being 
threatened in its existence by the increase of the radio- 
active poisoning of the air and of the soil resulting from 
the tests. 



WO 



Une &iJang,er of an -Sttomic War 



TODAY WE HAVE to envisage the menacing possibil- 
ity of an outbreak of atomic war between Soviet Russia 
and the United States. It can only be avoided if the 
two powers decide to renounce atomic arms. 

How has this situation arisen? 

In 1945, the United States produced an atom 
bomb with Uranium 235. On August 6, 1945, this bomb 
was released on Hiroshima, and on August 9, on 
Nagasaki. 

America's possession of such a bomb gave her a mili- 
tary advantage over other countries. 

In July, 1949, the Soviet Union also possessed such a 
bomb. And its power was equal to the one which was 
brought into being by America between 1946 and 1949. 
Consequently peace between the two powers "was main- 
tained on the basis of mutual respect for the other 
country's bomb. 

On October 3, 1952, England exploded its first atom 
bomb on the Isle of Montebello, on the northwest coast 
of Australia. 

Then, to secure an advantage, the United States made 
the decision to invite Dr. Edward Teller to produce the 

23 



24 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

hydrogen bomb. It was expected that this H-bomb 
would exceed many times the power o the uranium 
bomb. This bomb was first released in May, 1951, at 
Eniwetok on the Pacific atoll, Elugelab, in October, 
1952. On March 1, 1954, at Bikini, one of the group in 
the Marshall Islands in the Pacific Ocean, the perfected 
H-bomb was exploded. It was found that the actual 
power of the explosion was much stronger than was 
originally expected on the basis of calculations. 

But at the same time as the United States, the Soviet 
Union also started producing H-bombs, the first of 
which was exploded on August 12, 1953. Both powers 
progressed contemporaneously. (The United States in- 
vented the atom bomb during the Second World War, 
and subsequently worked on the principles of the 
rockets which served Germany in those days. ) 

War no longer depends on the ability of mighty air- 
planes to carry bombs to their targets. Now there are 
guided rockets that can be launched from their starting 
point and directed with accuracy to a distant target. 
Missiles are carried by such rockets propelled by a fuel 
which is constantly being developed in efficiency. The 
missile carried by the rocket can be an ordinary missile 
or one which contains a uranium warhead or an H-bomb 
warhead. 

It is said that the Soviet Union has rockets with a 
range of up to 625 miles, and with a probable range of 
up to 1,100 miles. 

The United States is said to possess rockets with a 
range of 1,500 miles. 



The Danger of an Atomic War 25 

Whether the so-called intercontinental missile with a 
range of 5,000 miles exists, cannot be ascertained. It is 
assumed that the problem of its production is on the 
way to being solved, and that both East and West are 
occupied with its production. 

Although an intercontinental rocket is not yet known 
to be completed, America has to be prepared for sub- 
marines shooting such a projectile far into the country. 
These rockets proceed with immense velocity. It is 
expected that an intercontinental rocket would not take 
more than half an hour to cross the ocean with bomb- 
loads of from one to five tons. 

How would an atomic war be conducted today? At 
first the so-called local war but today there is little 
difference between a local war and a global war. Rocket 
missiles will be used up to a range of 1,500 miles. The 
destruction should not be underestimated, even if 
caused only by a Hiroshima-type bomb, not to speak 
of an H-bomb. 

It can hardly be expected that an enemy will re- 
nounce the use of atom bombs, or the most perfected 
H-bombs, on large cities from the very outset The 
H-bomb has a thousandfold stronger development of 
power than the atom bomb. 

It is therefore quite possible that in a future atomic 
war both rocket projectiles and large bombers will be 
used together. Rocket projectiles will not replace 
bombers, but will rather complement them. 

The immediate effect of an H-bomb will have a range 
of several miles. The heat will be 100 million degrees. 



26 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

One can imagine how great would be the number o 
city-dwellers destroyed by the pressure of the explosion, 
by flying fragments of glass, by lieat and fire, and by 
radioactive waves, even if the attack were only of short 
duration. The deadly radioactive infection, as a con- 
sequence of the explosion, would have a range of some 
45,000 square miles. 

A United States general said to some congressmen: 
"If at intervals of ten minutes, one hundred and ten 
H-bombs are dropped over the U.S.A. there would be a 
casualty list of about seventy million people, besides 
some thousands of square miles made useless for a 
whole generation. Countries like England, West Ger- 
many, and France could be finished off with fifteen to 
twenty H-bombs/* 

President Eisenhower has pointed out, after watching 
maneuvers under atomic attack, that defense measures 
in a future atomic war become useless. In these cir- 
cumstances all one can do is to pray. 

Indeed, not much more can be done in view of an 
attack by H-bombs than to advise everyone to hide 
behind very strong walls of stone or cement, and to 
throw themselves on the ground, and to cover the back 
of their heads and the body, if possible, with cloth. In 
this way it might be possible to escape annihilation and 
death through radiation. It would be essential that 
those surviving be given food and drink which were 
not radioactive and that they be transported away 
from the radioactive district. 

It is impossible to erect walls of such thickness for 
the whole population of a city. Where would the ma- 



The Danger of an Atomic War 27 

terial and the means come from? How would a popula- 
tion even have time to run to safety in such, bunkers? 

In an atomic war there would be neither conqueror 
nor vanquished. During such a bombardment both sides 
would suffer the same fate. A continuous destruction 
would take place and no armistice nor peace proposals 
could bring it to an end. 

When people deal with atomic weapons, no one 
could say to the other, "Now the arms must decide"; 
but only, "Now we want to commit suicide together, 
destroying each other mutually. . . /* 

An English M.P. has said with good reason, "He 
who uses atomic weapons becomes subject to the fate 
of a bee, namely, when it stings it will perish inevitably 
for having made use of its sting.'* He who uses atomic 
weapons to defend freedom would become subject to a 
similar fate. 

Those who conduct an atomic war for freedom will 
die, or end their lives miserably. Instead of freedom 
they will find destruction. Radioactive clouds resulting 
from a war between East and West would imperil 
humanity everywhere. There would be no need to use 
up the remaining stock of atom and H-bombs. (There 
are about 50,000 of them.) 

An atomic war is therefore the most senseless and 
lunatic act that could ever take pkce. At all costs ii 
must be prevented. 



Unfortunately a cold war may turn into an atomic 
war. This danger is made greater today than it has ever 



28 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

been because of the possibility of employing long- 
distance rockets. 

In the past, the United States held to the principle of 
being, apart from the Soviet Union, the sole owner of 
atomic weapons. There was no virtue in equipping 
other countries with atom and H-bombs, for they would 
not have known what to do with them. But, with the 
arrival of rocket projectiles of a smaller type and a 
longer range, the situation is changing. The use of such 
smaller weapons is possible for lesser countries who 
are in alliance with America. Thus the United States 
has deviated from her principle of not putting atomic 
weapons into the hands of other countries, a decision 
which carries grave consequences. 

On the other hand it is understandable that America 
wishes to supply the NATO countries with such new 
weapons for defense against the Soviet Union. The 
presence of such arms constitutes a new threat to the 
Soviet Union, opening the way for an atomic war be- 
tween the United States and the Soviet Union on 
European soil. This situation did not exist before. Now 
the Soviet Union is within range of such rockets from 
European soil even as far as Moscow and Kharkov up 
to 1,500 miles away. 

Rockets of average range could be used for defense 
purposes by Turkey and Iran against the Soviet Union, 
into which they could penetrate deeply with such arms 
accepted from America, and the Soviet Union in turn 
might be forced into a situation in which it had to de- 
fend itself. 



The Danger of an Atomic War 29 

Both the United States and the Soviet Union may 
now seek alliances with the Middle East by offering 
such countries financial support. Any quarrels that 
might occur could start in secret; unknown events in the 
Middle East could endanger the peace of the world. 



The risk of an atomic war is being increased by the 
fact that no warning would be given in starting such 
a war, which could originate in some mere incident. 
The side that attacks first would have the initial ad- 
vantage over the attacked, which would at once sustain 
losses that would reduce its fighting capacity consider- 
ably. 

The necessity for a round-the-clock alert against 
attack carries with it the extreme danger of an error in 
interpreting what appears on a radar screen, when im- 
mediate action is imperative, resulting in the outbreak 
of an atomic war. 

Attention was drawn to this danger by the American 
General Curtis Le May, when the world was recently 
on the brink of such a situation. The radar stations of 
the U. S. Air Force and U. S. Coastal Command re- 
ported that an invasion of unidentified bombers was on 
the way. Upon this warning the General, who was in 
command of the strategic bomber force, decided to 
order a reprisal bombardment to commence. However, 
realizing the enormity of his responsibility, he then hesi- 
tated. Shortly afterward it was discovered that the radar 
stations had made a technical error. What would have 



30 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

happened if a less balanced general Had been in his 
place? 

In the future such dangers are likely to increase owing 
to the fact that small rockets exist which pass through 
the air with terrific speed and are difficult to identify, 
so that defense possibilities become very limited. The 
defense has only seconds in which to identify the ap- 
proaching rockets and to counterattack by exploding 
these before they can reach their targets, and at the 
same time dispatch bombers to destroy the ramps from 
which they were launched. 

Such decisions cannot be left to the human brain, for 
it works too slowly. They have to be entrusted to an 
electronic brain. If it appears on the radar screen that 
enemy rockets are really on the way, calculations as 
to their distance have to be made to the fraction of a 
second, so that an immediate start can be made by 
releasing defense rockets. 

All this proceeds automatically. Such is our achieve- 
ment that we now depend entirely on an electronic 
brain, and on errors and omissions from which such an 
instrument cannot be exempt. The making of a decision 
by means of an electronic brain, though quicker, is not 
so reliable as the making of a decision by the human 
brain. At some point the complex mechanism of the 
electronic brain may become faulty. 



These developments lead inevitably to a worsening of 
the situation. We have to reckon with the fact that the 



The Danger of an Atomic War 31 

United States may proceed with the supply of atomic 
weapons to other countries, trusting them not to use 
them selfishly or incautiously. The two other atomic 
powers are at liberty to do likewise. 

Yet, who can guarantee that among the favored 
countries in possession of such weapons there may not 
be black sheep acting on their own, without regard for 
the consequences? Who is to prevent them? Who is 
able to make them renounce the use of atomic weapons, 
even if other countries have decided to make such a 
decision in common? The dam is breached and it may 
collapse. 

That such anxieties have become very real is shown 
by a statement on January IS, 1958, on behalf of 9,235 
UNO scientists regarding the cessation of atomic 
tests. One of their points is the following; 

As long as atomic weapons remain in the hands of 
the three great powers, an agreement as to their 
control is possible. However, if the tests continue 
and extend to other countries in possession of 
atomic weapons, the risks and responsibilities in 
regard to an outbreak of an atomic war become all 
the greater. From every point of view the danger 
in a future atomic war becomes all the more in- 
tense, so that an urgent renunciation of atomic 
weapons becomes absolutely imperative. 

The United States* attitude to the renunciation of 
atomic weapons is remarkable. It cannot be otherwise 
her conviction is that they should be outiawed, yet at 



32 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

the same time in case tikis does not come about she 
strives with other NATO countries to put herself in the 
most favorable military situation. Thus America insists 
that the rockets which she offers to other countries 
should be accepted as soon as possible. She seeks to hold 
such a position to enable her to maintain peace by 
terrifying her opponent. But she is finding that most 
of the NATO countries are reluctant to acquire the 
weapons which they are being offered, because of an 
increasing strengthening of adverse public opinion. 

It would be of immense importance if the United 
States in this hour of destiny could decide in favor of 
renouncing atomic weapons to remove the possibility 
of an eventual outbreak of an atomic war. The theory 
of peace through terrifying an opponent by a greater 
armament can now only heighten the danger of war. 



A ray of light in darkness in December, 1957, the 
Polish Foreign Minister, RapacM, made the proposition 
that Czechoslovakia, East and West Germany should 
consist of an atom-free zone. If this proposal is accepted 
and the atom-free zones could be enlarged to include 
adjoining countries the maintenance of peace would be 
assured. The beginning of the end of the specter that 
overshadows the Soviet Union would become an accom- 
plished fact. 

With this sensible proposition, public opinion in 
Europe is in absolute agreement. It has become con- 
vinced, during recent months, that under no circum- 



The Danger of an Atomic War 33 

stances is Europe to become a battlefield for an atomic 
war between the Soviet Union and the United States. 
From this conviction it will no longer deviate. The 
time is past when a European country could plan 
secretly to establish itself as a great power by manu- 
facturing atomic weapons exclusively for its own use. 
Since public opinion would never agree to such an 
undertaking, it becomes senseless even to prepare 
secretly for the realization of such a plan. 

Past, too, is the time when NATO generals and 
European governments can decide on the establishment 
of launching sites and the stockpiling of atomic weap- 
ons. The dangers of atomic war and its consequences 
are now such that these decisions have ceased to be 
purely matters of politics and can be valid only with 
the sanction of public opinion. 



ree 



at the J4ilie5t cJLeuel 



WHAT IS THE POSITION regarding the negotiations 
that should lead to the renunciation of nuclear weapons? 

One reads and hears that the success of the projected 
Summit Conference must depend entirely on its every 
detail being diplomatically prepared beforehand. The 
best diplomacy is objectivity. A fitting preparation 
would be in sight (if a respectful and well-meaning 
criticism is permissible) if the statesmen and others 
associated with it would change from their present 
undiplomatic way of dealing with each other and return 
to a diplomatic method. Many unnecessary, thoughtless, 
discourteous, foolish, and offensive remarks have passed 
between them, both in the spoken and written word, 
to the disadvantage of the political atmosphere. 

It -would be right if, at last, those who have the 
authority to take the responsibility and not those who 
have only nominal authority and who cannot move an 
inch beyond their instructions would confer together. 

It would be right to go ahead with the conference. 
For close on four months, East and West have talked 
and written to one another without any conclusions as 
to reaching a specific date or program. Public opinion 

37 



38 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

everywhere is finding it difficult to accept this state of 
affairs and is beginning to ask itself whether a confer- 
ence which limps into being has any hope of really 
achieving anything. 

It would be right to hold the conference in a town in 
some neutral European country, for example, Geneva, 
as was the case in 1955. 

It would be right that at this conference only ques- 
tions that have to do directly with the renunciation of 
nuclear weapons should be discussed. 

It would be right if not too many people were present 
at the Summit meeting, Only the highest personalities 
of the three nuclear powers, together with their experts 
and advisers, should take their seats there. 

Admission could also be permitted to the representa- 
tives of those peoples who like the NATO countries 
associated with America are concerned in nuclear 
matters; they could then state their opinion on the de- 
cisions that also hold such grave consequences for them. 

It would only be in a quite arbitrary manner that 
other peoples could claim to be present at the Summit. 
Either all would be qualified to be there or none. In 
addition, experience teaches us that unnecessarily large 
attendance brings no advantage to a conference. 

The Summit Conference, therefore, is in no way an 
international or half-international one, even though its 
decisions are of great importance to the whole of man- 
kind* 

The three nuclear powers and they alone must decide, 
in awareness of their responsibility to their peoples and 



Negotiations at the Highest Level 39 

to all mankind, whether or not they will renounce the 
testing and the use of nuclear weapons. 



As to the planning of the conference, impartiality 
justifies one remark, which is that to date such planning 
has been done without objectiveness, and has therefore 
led nowhere. This leads to the thought that the same 
outcome could result from the Summit Conference if it 
were conducted in the same manner. 

Wherein lies the difference between the partial and 
the impartial, the fitting and the unfitting in this matter? 
It lies in the answer to the question as to the basis on 
which the three nuclear powers decide whether or not 
to renounce the testing and the use of nuclear weapons. 

The unobjective reply would be that the decision will 
depend on whether an agreement is reached on disarma- 
ment or not. This is false logic. It presumes that there 
could be an agreement acceptable to both the East and 
the West on this issue. But previous negotiations have 
shown that this is not to be expected; they got stuck 
right at the start because East and West were unable 
to reach agreement even on the conditions under which 
such discussions should take place. 

The anticipated procedure itself by its very nature is 
not impartial. It is based on false logic. The two vital 
issues so essential to the very existence of mankind 
the cessation of tests and the disposal of nuclear weap- 
onscannot be made dependent on the Heavens' per- 
forming the impossible political miracle that alone 



40 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

could ensure that none of the three nuclear powers 
would have some objection to a complete agreement on 
disarmament. 

""The fact is that the testing and the use of nuclear 
weapons carry in themselves the absolute reasons for 
being renounced. Prior agreement on any other condi- 
tions can-not be considered. Both cause the deepest 
damage to human rights. The tests, in that they do harm 
to peoples far from the territories of the nuclear powers 
and endanger their lives and their health and this in 
peacetime; an atomic war, in that the resulting radio- 
activity would make uninhabitable the land of peoples 
not participating in such a war. It would be the most 
unimaginably senseless and cruel way of endangering 
the existence of mankind. That is why it dare not be- 
come reality. 

The three nuclear powers owe it to themselves and to 
mankind to reach agreement on these absolute essentials 
without first dealing with prior conditions. 

The negotiations about disarmament are therefore 
not the forerunner of such agreement, but the outcome 
of it. They start from the point where agreement on the 
nuclear issues has been reached, and their goal is to 
reach the point where the three nuclear powers and 
the peoples who are connected with them must agree 
on guarantees that will seek to avert the danger of a 
threat of a nonatomic nature's taking the place of the 
previous danger. Everything that the diplomats will 
have done objectively to prepare the preliminaries to 
the conference will keep its meaning even if it will be 
used not before renunciation, but as the result of it. 



Negotiations at the Highest Level 41 

Should agreement be reached on the outlawing of 
nuclear weapons, this alone without any negotiations 
will have led to a great improvement in the political 
situation; as a result of such an agreement, time and 
distance would again become realities with their own 
rights. Nuclear arms give a distant war the effect of a 
near war. The Soviet Union and the United States, in 
spite of the vast distance that separates them, can 
menace one another with atomic missiles in such a 
frightful manner and in such a short space of time as 
though they adjoined each other. Having become 
neighbors, they are in constant fear of their lives every 
minute. 

But if nuclear arms were no longer in question, the 
rockets and missiles would not present nearly the same 
destructive danger. The nearness that endangers exist- 
ence would have ceased to be. If rockets are no longer 
nuclear arms, Europe is no longer a battlefield for a 
distant war which has the effect of a near war between 
the Soviet Union and the United States. 

Today the United States with her batteries of nuclear 
rockets is represented as a mighty military power in 
Europe. Europe has become an in-between land be- 
tween America and Russia, as if America by some dis- 
placement of a continent had come closer to her. But if 
atomic rockets were no longer in question, this un- 
natural state of affairs would come to an end. America 
would again become wholly America; Europe wholly 
Europe; the Atlantic again wholly the Atlantic Ocean. 

In this way the beginning of the end of the United 



42 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

States* military presence in Europe could come about 
a presence which has arisen from the two World Wars. 
The great sacrifices that the United States made for 
Europe during the Second World War, and in the years 
following it, will not be forgotten; the great and varied 
help that Europe received from her, and the thanks 
owing for this, will not be forgotten. But the unnatural 
situation created by the two World Wars that led to a 
dominating military presence in Europe cannot con- 
tinue indefinitely. It must gradually cease to exist, both 
for the sake of Europe and for the sake of America. 

Now there will be shocked voices from all sides. What 
will become of poor Europe if American atomic weap- 
ons no longer defend it from within and from without? 
What will happen if Europe is delivered to the Soviets? 
Must it then not be prepared to languish in a Com- 
munist-Babylonian form of imprisonment for long 
years? 

Here it should be said that perhaps the Soviet Union 
is not quite so malicious as to think only of throwing 
itself on Europe at the first opportunity in order to 
devour it, and perhaps not quite so unintelligent as to 
fail to consider whether there would be any advantage 
in upsetting her stomach with this indigestible meal. 

What Europe and the Europeans have to agree about 
is that they belong together for better or for worse. This 
is a new historical fact that can no longer be bypassed 
politically. 

Another factor that must be recognized politically is 
that the question is no longer one of subjugating peo- 



Negotiations at the Highest Level 43 

pies, but of learning to get along with them mentally 
and spiritually. A Europe standing on its own has no 
reason to despair. 



Disarmament discussions between the three nuclear 
powers must concern themselves with guarantees that 
actual, total, and irrevocable disposal of nuclear weap- 
ons will be secured. The problem of effective control 
will also have to be anticipated. Reciprocal agreement 
will have to be reached on permitting international 
commissions to investigate on national soil. 

One talks of giving aircraft belonging to an inter- 
national police force the right to fly at medium and 
high altitudes for purposes of spying. One asks to what 
extent a land would be willing to subject itself to such 
control over its own territory. Unfortunate incidents 
could easily occur. And what about the power that 
should be entrusted to such an international control? 
Even the furthest-reaching international control would 
not be able to give the assurance that in every country 
and in all agreements this trust will be fulfilled. In 
the final analysis East and West are dependent on pre- 
supposing a certain reciprocal trust in one another. 

This applies also in another matter. As a result of 
renouncing nuclear arms, the Soviet Union's military 
might, so far as Europe is concerned, would be less 
affected than that of the United States. There would re- 
main to the Soviet the many -divisions armed with con- 
ventional weapons; with those divisions it could easily 



44 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

overrun the NATO states in Western Europe~par- 
ticularly Western Germany without it being possible 
for anyone to come to their aid. With this in mind, the 
Soviet Union should agree in the course of disarmament 
negotiations to reduce her army, and to commit herself 
never to move against Germany. But here, too, no 
manner o detailed agreements and internationally 
guaranteed disarmament agreements would be enough; 
die parties concerned are still dependent on trusting 
one another. 

But we live in a time when the good faith of peoples 
is doubted more than ever before. Expressions throwing 
doubt on the trustworthiness of each other are bandied 
back and forth. They are based on what happened in 
the First World War when the nations experienced dis- 
honesty, injustice, and inhumanity from one another. 
How can a new trust come about? And yet, it must. 

We cannot continue in this paralyzing mistrust. If 
we want to work our way out of the desperate situation 
in which we find ourselves, another spirit must enter 
into the people. It can only come if the awareness of 
its necessity suffices to give us strength to believe in its 
coming. We must presuppose the awareness of this 
need in all the peoples who have suffered along with us. 
We must approach them in the spirit that we are human 
beings, all of us, and that we feel ourselves fitted to 
feel with each other; to think and to will together in the 
same way. 

The awareness that we are all human beings to- 
gether has become lost in war and through politics. 



Negotiations at the Highest Level 45 

We have reached the paint of regarding each other only 
as members of a people either allied with us or against 
us and our approach: prejudice, sympathy, or antipathy 
are all conditioned by that. Now we must rediscover the 
fact that we all together are human beings, and that 
we must strive to concede to each other what moral 
capacity we have. Only in this way can we begin to 
believe that in other peoples as well as in ourselves 
there will arise the need for a new spirit which can be 
the beginning of a feeling of mutual trustworthiness 
toward each other. The spirit is a mighty force for 
transforming things. We have seen it at work as the 
spirit of evil which virtually threw us back from striving 
toward a culture of the spirit into barbarism. Now let 
us set our hopes on the spirits bringing peoples and 
nations back to an awareness of culture. 

At this stage we have the choice of two risks: the one 
lies in continuing the mad atomic-arms race with its 
danger of an unavoidable atomic war in the near future; 
the other in the renunciation of nuclear weapons, and 
in the hope that the United States and the Soviet Union, 
and the peoples associated with them, will manage to 
live in peace. The first holds no hope of a prosperous 
future; the second does. We must risk the second. 

In President Eisenhower's speech of November 7, 
1957, a few days after the launching of Sputnik II, he 
said, "What the world needs more than a gigantic leap 
into space is a gigantic leap into peace." This gigantic 
leap consists in finding the courage to hope that the 
spirit of good sense will arise in individuals and in 



46 PEACE OR ATOMIC WAR? 

peoples, a spirit sufficiently strong to overcome the 
insanity and the inhumanity. 



If negotiations on disarmament are held, not as a pre- 
liminary to the renunciation of nuclear arms but as a 
result of it, they would have a much larger meaning. 
They would be a big step in the direction of finally 
liquidating the confused situation that followed the 
Second World War. 

Disarmament and all questions leading to a stable 
situation for example, the reunification of East and 
West Germany could be discussed much better after 
agreement had been reached on the renunciation of 
atomic weapons. A later conference could also deal with 
many issues left unresolved in the peace treaties after 
the Second World War. 

Once agreement on renunciation of nuclear arms had 
been readied it would be the responsibility of the 
United Nations to ensure that now as in the future they 
would be neither made nor used. The danger that one 
nation or another might hit on the idea of manuf acturing 
nuclear weapons will have to be borne in mind for 
some considerable time. We must consider ourselves 
lucky that they are not yet in the possession of other 
peoples elsewhere in the world. 

The problem of how far disarmament and renuncia- 
tion of all weapons can go will have to be investigated, 
because the Second World War showed what terrible 
destruction conventional weapons can cause, destruc- 



Negotiations at the Highest Level 47 

tion which the development of rockets lias potentially 
vastly increased. One wishes that agreement could be 
reached immediately to renounce rockets and missiles, 
but this can only come as a result of a spiritual ad- 
vance everywhere which as yet it is difficult to visualize. 

Of all the very difficult problems the future holds, 
the most difficult will be the rights of access of over- 
populated countries to neighboring lands. But if in our 
time we renounce nuclear arms we shall have taken the 
first step on the way to the distant goal of the end to 
all wars. If we do not do this we remain on the road that 
leads in the near future to atomic war and misery. 

Those who are to meet at the Summit must be aware 
of this, so that they can negotiate with propriety, with 
an adequate degree of seriousness, and with a full sense 
of responsibility. The Summit Conference must not 
fail: mankind will not again tolerate failure. The re- 
nunciation of nuclear weapons is vital to peace. 



I 




126915 



