Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



f 



HARVARD COLLEGE UBR\KY 



FROM THE 

Qcagc Sdiiinanannjadison 

FUND 
FOR THE PURCHASE OF BOORS ON 

ScxjalWSlfam (Sj: Moral Phuosophy 



OVEN [N HONOR OF HIS lyjtENlS.lHEIR SIMPUCTTT 
SNCERITYANDFMRIZSSNESS 



••:<^'^*- 



C.A? 



fc.#-- --^ -.- IW aw -^^^^^^^^^ 








THE 



ETHICS 



OF 



CONFORMITY AND SUBSCRIPTION. 



BT 



HENRY SIDGWICK, M.A., 

LATE FELLOW OP TRINITY COLLEGE, 
CAMBRIDGE. 



** Let every man he fully perstuzded in his ovm wind."— St. Paul. 



> 
-o 







/? ovo}ff^ 



WILLIAMS AND NORGATE, 

14, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON; 
AND 20, SOUTH FREDERICK STREET, EDINBURGH. 

1870. 



C G? H ^ ^' 



70 -S 




JjE^t^s/ja^-^vw ttAAA^^^A^ 



LONDON : 

PKINTED BT WOODFALL AND KINDBB, 

MILVORD LAKE, STRAND, W.C. 



^m^^mmm^mB^mmimmmm^tms^^ftmm 



TO THE READER. 



The relation between the Free Christian Union and the writers 
whose essays may appear under its name, will readily be inferred 
from its fundamental principle, of spiritual fellowship with 
mental independence. Each writer may be presumed to approve 
of the design and basis of the Union ; but the Union does not, 
conversely, assume responsibility for his individual judgments or 
reasonings. If its object were to recommend the opinions of a 
school, care would be taken to secure consistency of exposition 
and harmony of impression in its several productions. But, 
aiming as it does to release Christian Unity from the obligation 
of intellectual uniformity, it will rather welcome than reject the 
opportunity of presenting under various aspects the subjects 
with which its publications deal, and of helping the reader, by 
the influx of comparative lights, to more effective thought and 
arger sympathy. 



A 2 



''Let every man be Jidly persuaded in his own mind.'^ 



THE ETHICS OF CONFORMITY 
AND SUBSCRIPTION. 



I WISH to discuss in this pamphlet the duty which the 
persons who form the progressive — or, to use a neutral 
term, the deviating — element in a religious community 
owe to the rest of that community; the extent to 
which, and the manner in which, they ought to give 
expression and effect to their opinions within the com- 
munity ; and the point at which the higher interests of 
truth force them to the disruption of old ties and che- 
rished associations. I do not propose to treat the ques- 
tion as a theological one. Of course this would be a 
very natural mode of treatment ; and in an age like the 
first age of Protestantism, when men still believed that 
there was some one form of organization and set of 
doctrines to which the Divine favour was attached, but 
were disagreed as to which these were, any other view 
of the question would seem idle. The inquiry, theu 



6 THE ETHICS OF 

could simply be, what degree of variation from the true 
standard involved deadly error. Even now, it may be 
held by some, that if a man has the misfortune to hold 
erroneous opinions, he ought to keep them to himself, 
and outwardly appear to believe what he does not believe, 
rather than aggravate his guilt by the open rejection of 
saving truth. Or, they may hold that such a man is so 
certain to do wrong, that it is not worth while discuss- 
ing what he ought to do. Nay, men may even believe, 
in some vague way, that the favour of Heaven rests on 
a particular religious community, even though they 
may be unable to accept its distinctive theological 
opinions ; or, rather, though they may have renounced 
most of its dogmas, but not the one dogma that asserts 
the peculiar salvatory eflScacy of its discipline. To minds 
so constituted I shall not attempt to appeal, and it is 
the less necessary for me to do so, as the mind of 
England, in spite of much that has been said and 
written of late, is, after all, Protestant to the core ; and 
holds, that the spiritual welfare of man is not bound 
up with any ecclesiastical organization or ceremonial 
system, but depends on a right state of the feelings, 
«nd a right attitude of the will, sustained by a right 
apprehension of the nature of God, and of His purposes 
and dealings with men. 

And, on the whole, the recognition of the necessity of 
free inquiry, and of the possibility of conscientious dif- 
ference of opinion, almost without limit, is so general, 
that most of my readers will be prepared to discuss the 
question on the neutral ground of ethics. The general 



CONFORMITY AND SUBSCRIPTION. 7 

distinction between '' essentials and non-essentials" is 
one that we cannot pass over in considering it, but no 
particular view of this distinction need influence the 
argument, which will simply assume that there is such 
a distinction, more or less definite, recognized in the 
theological thought of communities and individuals, 
but varying from community to community and from 
individual to individual. 

It is necessary, however, to separate this question 
from another one, that in the minds of most men 
mixes with it and predominates over it. The blending 
is very natural, but at the same time it is the cause of 
the haze which hangs over the whole subject at present. 
It is very difficult for men, in all political and social 
discussions, to keep the ideal quite distinct from the 
actual, and not sometimes to prescribe present conduct 
on grounds which would only be valid if a distant and 
dubious change of circumstances were really certain 
and imminent. It is peculiarly difficult in discussing 
religious organizations, for these seem to depend, more 
directly than political, on the speculative belief of their 
members ; and in theology it is harder than in politics, 
for an ardent believer, especially if his beliefs be self- 
chosen, and not inherited, not to think that the whole 
world is on the point of coming round to his opinions. 
And hence the religious persons who, by the divergence 
of their opinions from the orthodox standard of their 
church, have been practically led to consider the subject 
of this pamphlet, have often been firmly convinced 
that the limits of their church must necessarily be 



1 



8 THE ETHICS OF 

enlarged at least sufficiently to include themselves ; and 
have rather considered the method of bringing about 
this enlargement, than what ought to be done until 
it is e£fected. But when we survey, impartially, the 
development of religious thought from the Beformation 
to the present time ; when we observe how the varieties 
of beliefs throughout the civilized world, and in 
Protestant countries the variety of religious organiza- 
tions, have continually increased — the interval between 
the extremes widening, and the intermediate opinions, 
or shades of opinion, becoming more numerous ; when 
we see how little the outward organization, symbols, and 
formulas of the different religious communities have 
been affected by the discoveries of science or the changes 
of philosophy, or the successive predominance of novel 
ideas, novel hopes and aspirations, in the political and 
social spheres — we shall feel it presumptuous to 
prophecy that any so great revolution is now impend- 
ing in the nature, extension, and mutual relations of 
the recognized creeds of Christendom, as to render a 
discussion like the present unnecessary. 

But, further, it is by no means clear, that if some 
great change in the external organization of religion 
has boon rendered necessary by the development of 
thought, such a change will not be effected, in the most 
simple and natural manner, by the spontaneous com- 
bination of individuals acting within or without the 
churches that at present exist, according as each may 
understand his duty. In the sphere of secular politics, 
a sober-minded philanthropist gradually learns to divide 



) 



CONPOBMITY AND SUBSCBIPTION. 9 

into three classes the reforms which he is anxious to 
bring about: those which he can begin to carry out 
himself, trusting to the direct effect of his individual 
energy and the indirect influence of his example ; those 
which it is worth while to attempt, if a sufi&ciently 
powerful private organization can be set on foot ; and 
those whidh necessitate the intervention of the State, 
and, consequently, a great stirring of the public mind 
on Hhe subject. In religious matters, among educated 
persons, of late years, it has perhaps been too mucfh the 
custom to neglect the first of these methods ; to sit 
with folded hands and wait till matters are ripe for 
great and sudden change ; when pei'haps the substitu- 
tion of a gradual change for a sudden one, would be as 
great a boon as they could confer upon society ; and 
when, by neglectiiig some simple and natural rule of 
personal conduct, they at once aggravate the certain evil 
that exists, and the probable evil of its remedy. 

I do not, then, maintain that the principles on which 
the Christian churches in England are constituted, and 
their customary discipline, are satisfactory : indeed, I 
think that organic change is required in the constitu- 
tion of the established Church, and even that an orga- 
nized effort ought speedily to be made to bring about 
such a change. But we shall better discuss the rules 
that should govern the private conduct of individuals 
in religious matters, if we separate the moral question 
from the ecclesiastical, and assume the traditional 
systems, avowed doctrines, and o£Bcial action of the 
religious communities to remain unaltered. 

B 



10 THE ETHICS OF 

It may be said, however, that this moral question (Kke 
most moral questions) is a very old one ; that it must 
have been settled long ago, and that there can be no 
particular advantage in raising it just now. 

It will be as well, therefore, to notice the charac- 
teristics of the present state of religious thought, which 
appear to famish the fresh conditions that render a 
fresh inquiry* desirable. 

The first of these lies in the large strides that we have 
recently made towards complete civil and social equality 
of creeds. The secular disadvantages that religious 
dissidences formerly entailed, have been so rapidly 
diminishing, that we may look forward confidently to 
their speedy extinction. We have abolished church 
rates ; we are inaugurating a system of primary educa- 
tion, which is, at any rate, designed to place all sects, as 
far as possible, on a par ; and it is obvious that the 
ecclesiastical restrictions on the higher education can- 
not be much longer maintained. A nonconformist is 
as eligible for any purely civil function, from legislation 
downwards, as a conformist who is unconnected with 
the landed aristocracy : indeed, the high- water mark of 
toleration was indicated at the last general election, by 
the balanced debate among educated persons as to 
whether violent and obtrusive atheism should be con- 
sidered a disqualification for the House of Commons. 
Moreover, the tone and manner adopted towards dissi- 
dents by the adherents, even the ministers, of the estab- 
lishment, has changed with the changing times, — ^partly, 
perhaps, from policy, partly, no doubt^ from natural and 



CONFORMITY AND SUBSCRIPTION. 11 

sincere expansion of sympathy. The effort to unite cor- 
dially with Dissenters, wherever such union is possible, 
has ceased to be the differencing characteristic of one 
party in the Church of England ; and it is but rarely that 
a conformist dares to avow in public any sentiment but 
respect for conscientious nonconformity. Even those 
who are fighting for the relics of Anglican privilege, 
have altered the lines of their defence ; and instead of 
sharp, stem monitions of the sin of schism, offer 
voluble and pathetic appeals to " our common Chris- 
tianity." These changes in external circumstances and 
general opinion inevitably affect our view of the pro- 
priety of lax conformity as a question of private con- 
duct. As long as a man's religious profession exercised 
a powerful influence on his secular prospects and social 
position, it was impossible that it should be decided 
solely (as it ought to be decided) by religious sympa- 
thies and theological agreement. As long as the spirit 
of sectarianism drew barriers between sect and sect, 
that prevented the interchange of thought and sympathy 
and narrowed the intellectual and spiritual life of each, 
higher considerations than those of mere worldly inte- 
rest might induce a man to attach himself to the most 
comprehensive. The sectarian spirit is by no means 
extinguished among us. But, on the one hand, it is 
more and more confined to its proper sphere, and has 
less and less influence on the social relations or on 
the intellectual and even the spiritual development of 
individuals. On the other hand, it has become more 
and more manifest that enforced external union 

B 2 



12 THB ETHICS OP 

persons whose theological differences are not snbdned 
by their religions sympathies, exacerbates rath^ than 
mollifies the schismatic temper. 

Tet again, this toleration is not (in England, at 
least, and as I know it) the mere drapery of enlightened 
nnbelief; nor is it a mere external compromise, 
dne to the political maxims or indifferentist inclina- 
tions of secular persons. It has a deeper root in the 
present tendencies of religions thought; and not of 
religions thought only, but of all thought on subjects 
where first principles and method are as yet indeter- 
minate, and where therefore persons of equal intel- 
ligence, sincerity, and application, are continually 
led to the most profoundly diverse conclusions. 
ControYersies on such subjects are carried on, not 
perhaps less keenly than before, but more fairly, 
temperately, and dispassionately, with more mutual 
understanding, and, we may almost say, mutual 
interest, in the conflicting opinions. This tempered 
dogmatism must be carefully distinguished from the 
superficial eclecticism that sometimes results from 
the Bame causes, the state of mind that prides itself 
on holding no form of creed in particular, but com- 
bining the best parts of all: this latter is not, I 
think, peculiarly characteristic of the present age; 
what I am noticing is the habit of holding opinions 
firmly and earnestly, and yet, as it were, at arm's 
length, of seeing how they look when viewed on the 
outside, and divining by analogy how the opinions of 
others look when viewed on the inside. A dogmatist 



OONFOBMITX 4HI) BT7B80BIPTION. 19 

of this temper has a natairal respect for, even a spon:- 
taneous sympathy with^ any one who holds any creed 
with consistency, clearness, and sincerity. Accord- 
ingly, one result of this increase of real internal tolera-^ 
tion on the part of dogmatists^ is to encourage much 
greater openness and unreserve on the part of heretics 
of all kinds and degrees. This openness is sometime^ 
deplored by ecclesiastical writers and speakers, but in 
the present strained relations of intellectual culture 
and religious faith, the most fatal mistake that can be 
made in the interests of the latter, next to that of 
discouraging theological inquiry as sinful, is to dis^ 
courage the expression of theological disagreement as 
unedifying. It would be a great gain to religion if 
preachers would abandon all idea of restricting inquiry 
and discussion, and confine themselves entirely (in so 
far as they deal with the question) to improving the 
method of inquiry, and elevating the manner of the 
discussion. 

For finally, this frankness, even audacity, in theo- 
logical investigation and discussion, is rendered espe- 
cially necessary by a fact, the influence of which upon 
theology is often noticed, although not quite from this 
point of view — I mean the increasing predominance of 
positive science as an element of our highest intellectual 
culture. It is sometimes argued that to the modern 
mind, imbued with the methods of positive science, and 
fascinated by the certainty of its conclusions, theology 
must inevitably become more and more shadowy and 
unreal, and its interminable debates more and more 



14 THE ETHICS OF 

distasteful. But against this it may be urged that the 
scientific inquiries which are most eagerly pursued, and 
excite the keenest interest in lookers-on, are precisely 
those where the method is least determinate, the 
reasonings most hypothetical, and the conclusions most 
disputable. Nor is the contemptuous disparagement 
or the dictatorial regulation of the method of theology, to 
which the students of positive science are prone, worthy 
of serious consideration. Persons of wide interests and 
eager constructive impulse are constantly endeavouring 
to transcend the limits which nature and circumstances 
have set to their intellectual range, and pronouncing 
upon the knowableness of that which is to themselves 
unknown ; but the futility of such efforts has been 
amply demonstrated by a wide experience. What 
theology has to learn from the predominant studies of 
the age is something very different from advice as to its 
method or estimates of its utility ; it is the imperative 
necessity of accepting unreservedly the conditions of 
life under which these studies live and flourish. It is 
sometimes said that we live in an age that rejects 
authority. The statement, thus unqualified, seems mis- 
leading ; probably there never was a time when the 
number of beliefs held by each individual, undemon- 
strated and unverified by himself, was greater. But it is 
true that we only accept authority of a particular sort ; 
the authority, namely, that is formed and maintained by 
the unconstrained agreement of individual thinkers, each 
of whom we believe to be seeking truth with single- 
mindedness and sincerity, and declaring what he has 



CONPOBMITY AND SUBSCRIPTION. 16 

fonnd with scrupulous yeracity, and the greatest attain- 
able exactness and precision. In respect of theologians, 
for the most part, we have hitherto been able to feel no 
such security. Theology has gone as far as the moral 
sense and natural instincts of mankind would allow 
(and the limit is certainly elastic), in discouraging 
single-minded inquiry, discouraging exactness of state- 
ment, discouraging sincerity of utterance. It has dwelt 
on the imbecility of the inquisitive intellect, the inade- 
quacy of language to express profound mysteries, the 
unedifying effect of truth upon an unprepared audience.^ 
I do not mean that these topics are now so prominent as 
they once were. It is just because a change is taking 
place in this respect ; because among the most orthodox 
theologians there are men imbued with the best 
qualities of the scientific spirit; because the tide of 
opinion is moving in this direction, and the conviction 
is daily growing among earnestly religious Protestants of 
all shades, that the exceptional protection that has been 
claimed for theological truth is a fatal privilege ; that 
the time seems to me to have come for a dispassionate 
discussion of the subject of this pamphlet. If English 
Protestants accept as a fact which they cannot alter,, 
that the divergence of religious beliefs, conscientiously 
entertained by educated persons, is great, is increasing, 
and shows no symptom of diminution ; if they admit the 
principles of complete toleration and complete freedom 
of inquiry ; if they admit the importance of our feeling, 
when we are instructed on matters of the highest 
moment, the same security which we feel on less 



16 THE ETHICS OF 

important subjects, that onr teacher is deelaring to us 
trnth precisely as it appears to him, without reserve 
or qualification ; then how are they to organize their 
religious instruction, and combine in a common formula 
of worship ? what are to be the terms of membership 
in their churches, and the conditions of performing 
ministerial functions, in so far as these are determined, 
not by express provisions, but by common under-* 
standing ? 

It may be said that after all this question cannot 
Xieed fnany words: an honest man can settle it on the 
simple principles of ordinary morality. He has only 
td refuse ever to say what he does not believe, or violate 
in the least point any engagement into which he has 
entered, and to join the Church that he believes to be 
the best, and he cannof go wrong* The answer is that 
if it could be so simply settled, honest men would be 
practically found to settle it in the same way< Bui 
every one's experience will tell him that this is not the 
case. Take ten honest laymen of education, members of 
tiie Church of England, neither fanatical nor indiflferent 
in their religion, and whose thoughts have been turned 
to this subject. Is it not most probable that at least 
half of them will admit that the conditions of religious 
union necessitate some relaxation of the strict rule jtist 
mentioned, and that each of these will differ from 
the others as to the proper limits of this relaxation ? 
I have said ''members of the Church of England," as it 
is to these that my remarks are principally directed ; 
but they apply (to some extent at least) to members of 



GONFOBMITY AND BUB8CBIPTI0N. 17 

other denominations. No doubt, in an established 
Ghnrch, whose relations to the State are, theoretically,, 
very undefined, with a prescribed formula of worship, 
and an elaborate official creed three centuries old, the 
perplexities of this question reach their maximum ; but 
they must be also felt by an increasing number of 
highly-educated nonconformists, whose experience has 
convinced them of the evils of sectarianism, while 
they have gradually come to consider some or all of 
the distinctive doctrines and principles of their respec- 
tive churches as erroneous or doubtful, or at any rate 
comparatively unimportant. Of course the most natural 
prima facie view of most churches is, that they are 
associations of persons holding special doctrines ; that 
each member of them holds these doctrines ; and that 
when any member has made up his mind that he does 
not hold them, he withdraws. And especially where, 
as is the case in most of our churches, each member 
has made, on admission to the privileges of member- 
ship, a more or less precise declaration ^ of adhesion^ 
not to the distinctive teaching of the Church, but to 
certain doctrines selected as fundamental. 

Still this assumption would not correspond to the 
actual facts of the case, even in the strictest' sect. I do 
not mean merely that members do not always withdraw 

* As this declaration, in Gongregationalist churohes, is in no set 
form, it may vaiy indefinitely in striotness, and it is diffionlt ta 
ascertain the actual practice at any time in respect of it Uni- 
tarians exact no expression of doctrinal agreement; nor do 
Wesleyans, nnless the avowal of a felt need of salvation from 
sin be ao regmbd. 





18 THE ETHICS OF 

when they have ceased to hold any of these funda- 
mental doctrines; but it is not expected that they 
should withdraw : they violate no common understand- 
ing in not withdrawing. 

And this is because feelings that every one must 
respect make it impossible for a man voluntarily to 
abandon a church as easily as he would withdraw from 
a scientific or philanthropic association. The ties that 
bind him to it are so much more intimate and sacred, 
that their severance is proportionably more painful. The 
close relations of kinship and friendship in which he 
may stand to individual members of the congregation, 
present an obstacle to severance which all, in practice, 
recognize, if not in theory ; but even to the community 
itself, and its worship, he is still bound by the strong 
bands of hereditary affection, ancient habit, and, pos- 
sibly, reUgious sympathies outliving doctrinal agree- 
ment. These considerations, it may be said, ought 
not to weigh against the fact of fundamental disagree- 
ment ; but a common case — ^probably the commonest at 
the present day — is when the point at issue, though 
selected as fundamental by the Church, is not so 
regarded by the divergent: it may very likely appear 
to him to possess no religious importance whatsoever. 
A man who feels no impulse to leave a community, 
and sees no gain in joining any other, can hardly be 
expected to excommunicate himself; others, sympathiz- 
ing with his motives, shrink from excommunicating 
him ; and thus " multitudinism " (to use Mr. Wilson's 
phrase) creeps in, tacitly, but not .illegitimately, 



CONFOBMITT AND SUBSCEIPTION. 19 

even into churqhes avowedly based npon a different 
principle. 

No objection can be made to this result if it be 
clearly understood on both sides ; no one, at any rate, 
can object to it who deprecates the narrowness of the 
avowed basis upon which most sects are framed. But 
it would seem that the duty of making his position 
clear rests with the divergent ; and if his position is 
not made clear, if the terms of membership are merely 
relaxed in the esoteric opinion of the enlightened few, 
if he gives other men fair reason for believing that he 
holds opinions which he does not hold, — then his con- 
duct can only be defended on grounds on which all 
other religious hypocrisy may be defended. " Toutes 
les deceptions " (to adapt a phrase of Auguste Comte's) 
" sont solidaires," and the heretical Protestant layman 
who deliberately passes for orthodox, has an uncomfor- 
table family likeness to the infidel Popish priest who 
prostrates himself before the Bambino. 

It cannot, however, be seriously maintained, that any 
such deception is involved in the profession of member- 
ship of the Church of England. What is involved in 
this profession it would not be easy to say : indeed it 
is a question which does not admit of a definite answer, 
as there are several conflicting theories on the subject, 
framed upon radically different principles, and no 
authority to decide which is the sound one. The 
extreme view on one side is, that the National Church 
is coextensive with the nation, and therefore every 
Englishman a member of the Church of England. That 

c 2 



20 THB ETHIOS OF 

he ought to be so, and wonld be bo in a satisfactory 
state of things, is of course the view of a large and 
influential party ; but that he actually is so was main- 
tained with apparent gravity, during the late Irish 
Church controversy, by the learned and vehement Pro- 
fessor Brewer. On the other hand, most of the clergy, 
I believe, lay down that the Apostles' Creed * is binding 
upon the Anglican laity. In saying this, they probably 
mean that this Creed is what the Church should be 
conceived as wishing the laity to hold, rather than what 
she must be considered as expecting them to hold. If 
they mean the latter, they certainly declare a private 
opinion, and not a common understanding. No doubt, 
when we look at the position which this summary of 
dogma occupies in the ceremonies of Baptism and 
Confirmation, it seems most natural to regard the 
Church as an association of persons holding all this 
dogma ; but, practically, no one dreams of seceding (or 
expecting another to secede) from the Church of Eng- 
land because he cannot assent to this or that statement 
of the Apostles' Creed. That a secession on such 
grounds alone would strike every one as absurd, is the 
clearest possible proof that the common understanding 
in the Church of England is not that a man believes 
the whole of the Apostles' Creed, but that he has 
been taught the whole of it, and believes as much 
as he thinks necessary. 

* " Ordy the Apostles' Creed," as I have generally heard it put. 
This seems a trifling burden, no doubt, in comparison with the 
Thirty-iuue Articles. 



WagtF^TS? 



CONFOBMITY AND SUBSCBEPTION. 21 

In fact, all this attempt to define lay-membership 
seems idle to most practical men. '' The Chnrch of 
Englaiid/' they seem to hold, " is composed of respec- 
table persons who are willing to go to church. Any 
further definition is pedantic and superfluous." I am 
very far from wishing to thin our churches by raising 
scruples in the breast of any respectable person ; and 
so long as the sole ecclesiastical function of the laity is 
to go to church, the question may perhaps be left in 
this yague condition. But eveu now, in the case of 
offices of trust and emolument that are restricted to 
members of the Church of England, some definition 
is required, and where a declaration of bond fide mem- 
bership is made by the candidate for such an office, is 
urgently necessary ; as even a strict test, clearly under- 
stood, is less vexatious and demoralizing than one that 
is lax but ill-defined. It may be said, however, that 
as all such tests and restrictions, the last relics of 
Anglican privilege, will soon be swept away, the ques- 
tion is scarcely worth discussing in this connection. 
And I trust that this is so; but, meanwhile, there seems 
great prospect of its being raised in a new quarter. 
We have heard of late a tolerably loud and apparently 
increasing cry, in which persons with very different 
ultimate objects join, that some share should be given 
to the laity in ecclesiastical administration. Before 
any practical machinery can be devised for satisfying 
this demand, it will be necessary to define who the 
laity ar6, I should propose to define them as persons 
who, having been baptized according to the rites of the 



22 THE ETHICS OF 

Church of England, have not formally seceded; or, who 
do not ohject to pay chnrch-rates. If the line were 
drawn more strictly (as, e.g., to include only communi- 
cants), so many persons would be excluded — especially 
when their attention was thus pointedly drawn to their 
actual theological position — ^that disestablishment, fol- 
lowed by still further division, would be almost inevitable. 
But it is sometimes said, that a lay member of the 
Church of England must, at any rate, be a person who 
goes to church, and takes part in the Anglican service ; 
that this service, besides including the recital of two, 
and sometimes three creeds, implies throughout the 
system of doctrines of which these creeds are the 
definite expression ; that there cannot be more obvious 
hypocrisy than that of taking part in a service without 
believing the doctrines which it implies ; that as we 
cannot suppose a conscientious person doing this, and 
as in a theoretical discussion of the subject we consider 
only conscientious persons, the Church of England is 
abeady even more strictly limited, in theory, than the 
straitest of the clergy maintain. Here, again, at first 
sight, there seems much to be said for this view ; but it 
is clearly in conflict with common sense and the common 
understanding upon the subject, and fails to recognize 
the conditions under which alone a formula of national 
worship is possible. Just as no one means by the 
Church of England, an association of persons who believe 
all the doctrines contained in the creeds, and all the 
assumptions implied in the prayers, so it is clear that 
a church so defined could not continue to exist on its 



n^ 



CONFOEMITY AND BUBSCBIPTION. 23 

present footing. The service of a national church, I 
think, ought to be (as the service of the Church of 
England, roughly speaking, is) framed in accordance 
with the theological convictions of the majority of the 
nation. The common understanding is, and, I think, 
ought to be, that the dissentient minority take part or 
do not take part in it, according to each man's estimate 
of the importance of his degree of dissent from its 
assumptions. Now, I should protest against the view 
that would leave the whole question of the duty of 
conformity and nonconformity to be settled by in- 
dividual instinct and sentiment ; it seems to me to 
proceed from a mere desire to evade the difficulties 
of the question. But this particular point can hardly 
be settled otherwise. Not only is there no definite 
rule laid down by common understanding, but the effect 
of public worship on the worshipper is so complex and 
so various, that it would be very inexpedient to lay 
down such a rule. The minds of some are so con- 
stituted, that it would be a mockery to them to take 
part in a service not framed in exact accordance with 
their theological convictions ; . to others, again, quite as 
genuinely religious, but more influenced by sympathies 
and associations, the element of intellectual agreement 
appears less important. 

If it be replied, that to take part in a religious 
service without intellectual agreement is, after all, 
incompatible with perfect sincerity, it may be answered, 
that no layman is bound to take any more part in a 



24 THE BTHIOB OV 

service than he desires. Nor is this a mere evasion. 
The hypocrisy of a symholical act depends upon the 
interpretation generally put upon it. Now there is a 
very definite common understanding, that every one 
who utters words before others, utters them in the 
sense commonly attached to them; but there is no 
such understanding that a man, by his mere bodily 
presence, where words are uttered by others, impHes 
that he holds the beliefs which they express, or the 
assumptions which they involve. If it be still said 
that such bodily presence without mental assent is 
alien to the Protestant conception of public worship, 
and, pro tanto, converts the service into a ceremonial, 
I must admit it, and should only maintain that the 
Protestant conception of public worship is an ideal to 
which, in the present state of religious thought, we 
should only attempt to approximate. 

On the other hand, no one can feel more strongly 
than I do that, if the religious life of the nation is to 
be in a healthy state, we ought continually to try and 
approximate to this ideal as far as possible, as far as is 
consistent with the inevitable conditions of national 
worship. 

And, firstly, if we acquiesce in a formula of worship 
that only represents the convictions of a majority of 
worshippers, we may, at any rate, reasonably endeavour 
to secure that it does represent the convictions of a 
majority. And this can only be eflPectually secured by 
the frank and fiom avowal, on all proper occasions, on 



CONFOBMiTy ANI> SUBSCBIPTION. 25 

the part of the laity,* of all serious and deliberate 
doctrinal disagreement with any portion of the service ; 
that so we may know more clearly than we do at 
present when public opinion is ripe for any alteration. 
There is little doubt, however, that the existing An- 
glican service, compiled in the sixteenth century from 
tnedisBval formulsB of devotion, does not, in certain 
jpoints, correspond to the convictions even of a majority 
of habitual worshippers in Anglican churches. Some 
of these, perhaps, might be altered decisively by im- 
mediate legislation; but it seems more desirable, on 
the whole, to modify the Act of Uniformity, and to relax 
the rigidity with which the service, the whole service, 
and nothing but the service, is now imposed upon 
fevery Anglican congregation. The difficulty of doing 
this, as long as the rigidity of the law provides the 
only protection to the laity against the idiosyncrasies 
and vagaries of the clergy, I admit to be very great ; 
but this difficulty would vanish if the demand of 
which I have previously spoken were satisfied, and 
sonie legal, regular control over the administration of 
their church allowed to each congregation. 

But, secondly, if the majority have a right to claim 
that the service should be framed to suit their 
devotional needs, and therefore in accordance with 
their dogmatic convictions, the minority, on the other 
hand, may respectfully urge that these dogmatic 
convictions need not be introduced in such a manner 
as to give the maximum of offence to those who do not 

* I assume that we are agreed upon a definition of this body. 



26 THE ETHIOS OF 

hold them, and at the same time produce the minimum 
of devotional effect. The formal recital of creeds is 
neither a natural expression of the sentiment of 
worship, nor obviously effective in stimulating devo- 
tion; and the proper place for such abridged state- 
ments of doctrine, even supposing them accurately to 
express the convictions of the existing generation of 
churchmen (which can hardly be said of our present 
creeds), would appear to be a manual of instruction 
rather than .a formula of worship. 

This question of the recital of creeds and of the 
dogmatic assumptions of the service generally, takes a 
different aspect when we consider the position of the 
officiating minister. It brings us face to face with the 
question evaded as regards laymen. May a man use 
words in a non-natural sense, a sense which, according 
to ordinary acceptation of language, they will not bear ? 
No one, I think, who has reflected carefully on this ques- 
tion, will think it admits of a simple reply. Unfortu- 
nately, a great many who have not carefully reflected do 
think so ; and the result of leaving the question to be 
settled by the obscure working of conscientious instinct 
is that very little opportunity is given for establishing 
a rational and moderate view 

The case is one which it is peculiarly undesirable to 
leave to conscientious instinct, as the obvious argu- 
ments on the one side are so strong, that many do not 
wait to see whether they are counterbalanced by still 
stronger arguments on the other. There is no moral 
rule so simple, so easily comprehended, as the rule 



CONFOKMITT AND SUBSCRIPTION. 27 

of strict veracity of speech: no virtue in which it 
seems more necessary that a minister of religion 
should at any rate not fall helow the ordinary stan- 
dard; there is no case in which it is more re- 
pugnant to natural feeling that this rule should 
he violated, than in the deliberate and daily renewed 
utterance, with all possible solemnity of place and 
time, of religious belief and aspiration. There is 
no danger to religion which an earnest person more 
deplores and dreads than that there should insinuate 
itself into his religious exercises a sense of their, 
shadowiness and unreality : a feeling that the view of the 
universe which they are framed to suit is not precisely 
that which his innermost self actually takes ; that it 
does not quite correspond to the principles upon which 
he, on the whole, intends to act'; does not represent the 
sum of his knowledge and belief respecting the facts 
of the world and life. This feeling Eitualism endea- 
vours to crush by availing itself of all possible stimu- 
lants to the imagination. To the Protestant, whose 
sense of the spirituality of worship is offended by these, 
the only substitute for them is a persuasion of the utter 
sincerity of the minister speaking in the name of the 
congregation. If it be once admitted that the minister 
may speak to never so small an extent as a play-actor, 
or an automaton, this persuasion seems irretrievably 
shattered. 

The force of these considerations is undeniable ; but 
reflection shows, that if allowed to operate unqualified, 
they render an educated ministry and a perfectly uniform 



2d TH£! EtHIGd^ OF 

worship an impossible combination. As all human 
work is imperfect, it is probable that the most carefully 
constructed form of prayer, especially so elaborate a one 
as that of the Church of England, must necessarily 
have blemishes which will reasonably ofifend many 
persons among the majority to whose opinions it is 
designed to correspond. It will very likely be found to 
involve irr,econcilable inconsistencies, if naturally inter- 
preted. But however it may begin, in the progress of 
religious thought, it will inevitably become less and less 
adapted to the views of the age. This may not be always 
due to doctrinal change. Some portions of it may ob* 
viously contemplate a state of the Church different from 
that which subsequently comes to exists others may 
breathe sentiments with which we cannot really sympa- 
thize. Now I by no means think that this growing want 
of adaptation should be acquiesced in. In fact, I have 
proposed that the Act of Uniformity should be abolished, 
and greater flexibility allowed in the use of the service ; 
in this way the parts that were generally distasteful 
might become known, and from time to time removed 
from the books.^jBut however smooth and flexible the 
machinery of cUange was made, there would always be 
a period during which public opinion was being formed 
with respect to each alteration. And to say that during 
this period no one who was in favour of the change 
should perform the functions of the ministry, would be 
to lay down a rule so practically ruinous, that the most 
rigid moral theorist must recoil from it. I have my- 
self no strong desire, as will presently appear, that, 



CONFOBMITT AND 8X7BSCBIPTION. 29 

with theological thought in its present chaotic staie^ 
adyanced thinkers should occn^^ the pulpits of the 
established Church. It seems to me impossible that a 
man can satisfactorily perform the functions of pastor 
if his opinions are not more or less in harmony with 
those of his flock. But it is intolerable that he should 
be chained down (I do not mean by law, but by 
common opinion as to his duty) to perpetual agree- 
ment with the least progressive section of them. Ima 
natural state of things, he ought to be the first to see 
distinctly, while others are only obscurely feeling, the 
incongruity between the prayers he has to read and the 
real beliefs of his generation ; and when the time is 
ripe for the removal of this incongruity, he ought to 
take a prominent part in its removal.^^ 

While, then, I cannot but regardm as an evil that ja 
clergyman should speak in church any words that he 
cannot speak with sincerity, it seems to me an evil 
that we must accept, and should only try to minimize. 
And one way of minimizing it, the way to which 
I especially wish to direct attention, is by making 
cur conceptions as clear as possible in respect of the 
amount of deviation from strict sincerity to be per- 
mitted. It is a universal principle of ethics, that if 
any exceptions are to be admitted to a moral rule, the 
exertions should in their turn be made as regular as 
possible. I do not mean that a definite line can be 
drawn. Most would agree that the deviations should 
be neither numerous nor important. But no one could 
fix the number, and no two persons wojild agree 



80 THE ETHIOS OF 

precisely as to the importance of any particular deyia- 
tion. But if each minister, maintaining deliberately 
that a certain amount of divergence was legitimate and 
inevitable, would openly avow his own, a great gain 
would be achieved. On the one hand, the reasonable- 
ness of the principle would, I think, appear after 
argument, even to persons who at first were startled by 
its laxity. On the other hand, the attention of the 
laity would be directed to the value of sincerity in 
devotional expression. We should get rid entirely of 
the sophistries and evasions which now, I think, do 
more than anything else to tarnish the clerical repu- 
tation for veracity. 

Of course individuals would take different views of 
their duty, as they do now. Persons of the same views 
would draw the line, some for, some against themselves. 
It is impossible to avoid this ; and, perhaps, if our wish 
is to maintain delicacy of sentiment while meeting 
practical exigencies, it is not altogether desirable to 
avoid it. But I think that the present almost appalling 
divergence of opinion among honourable and conscien- 
tious clergymen on this subject, would be much reduced 
if the question were debated openly before the public, 
with a full recognition of its difficulties, and a sober 
determination to solve them in the best possible way. 
Such casuistical questions are no doubt odious to com- 
mon sense, but when they are also practical questions, 
it is especially important that the attention of common 
sense, — ^that is, of the mass of well-intentioned, 
intelligent; and disinterested personSi — should be 



CONFOBMITY AND SUBSCRIPTION, 81 

called to them. It is only in this way that we can 
neutralize and dispel at once the special sophistries 
that tempt, and the singular scruples that beset, an in- 
diyidual thinker shaping his private conduct in solitude. 
As this view of the inevitable insincerity (to some 
extent) of the Anglican ministry will be new to many 
persons, and distasteful to those to whom it is new, it 
inay be as well to illustrate it by some examples. It 
will be new, not because most persons have not noticed 
passages in the Anglican service which, taken in their 
obvious sense, do not correspond to ordinary belief, 
but because they have supposed or heard of some other 
sense in which they might be taken. And where the 
new meaning is one which the words will fairly bear, 
we ought certainly to accept it, and be thankful that a 
venerable formula will adapt itself to the changing 
beliefs and sentiments of men, without needing the 
rude touch of a reformer. But where this new mean- 
ing cannot be imported without violent straining of 
language, it seems to me less troublesome, and cer- 
tainly not more injurious to our habits of sincerity, to 
admit that the words have become meaningless to 
the speaker. Two curiously contrasted instances of 
this occur naturally: the perfect confidence in the 
future happiness of all members of the Church of 
England apparently expressed in the Burial Service, 
aitd the unhesitating condemnation of the unorthodox 
prescribed by the Athanasian Creed.* 

* The Privy Council appear to have decided, that the piinisl 
ment of the unorthodox need not be believed to be " everlasting 



1^2 th]b: ethics 0^ 

But to make mare clear the distinction that I haye 
been trying to draw, I will compare two clauses of the 
Apostles' Creed, preferring these from the peculiar 
prominence given to that formula in the AngUoan 
servi<3eft. I may perhaps remark, that I have no per- 
sonal ground for the distinction which I draw between 
them^ as I am equally unable to assent to either. 

The first is the clause affirming a belief in "the 
ilesurrection of the Body.*' I do not see how these 
words can, without straining, be understood, except ^as 
asserting a belief that bodies, in some sense the s^me 
as those which have been buried, will, at a certain timci, 
emerge from the surface of the earth. But, as far a^ J. 
can ascertain, the majority of even orthodox laity, and 
many of the clergy, do not believe this ; holding, rather, 
that the soul's life, though continued after death, will 
continue in some way incomplete until the termination oi 
the present life of humanity on the earth, and that the9 
its vitality will be perfected by its being (in some ^ensd) 
re-embodied. Now, it seems to me an evil, that men 
should go on saying one of these things and believing 
the other. Still, we should all feel that a man wa^ 
over-scrupulous who declined to perform ministerial 
functions solely on the ground that he held the latteipr 
of these beliefs instead of the former. 

in the ordinary sense of the word. I think it right to accept their 
decision, though I cannot here follow their arguments. Btit I 
do not raise this question. A clergyman, though himself a rigid 
Trinitarian, may easily be unable to convince himself that every 
one, except a rigid Trinitarian, is doomed to even remotely 
terminable punishment. 



CONFORMITY AND SUBSCRIPTION. 83 

I will compare with this the belief that Jesus Christ 
was bom of the Virgin Mary. A man may certainly 
be a sincere Christian in the strictest sense — that is, he 
may believe that Jesus was God — without holding this 
belief. Many persons now take an intermediate view' 
of miracles between accepting and rejecting them en 
bloc. They hold that miracles may occur, and that some 
recorded in the Gospel undoubtedly did occur ; but that 
also legends may have been mixed up with the evan- 
gelical narrations, and that some probably have been. 
A man who holds this general view is very likely to 
reject the miraculous conception of Jesus, as the narra- 
tive of it has a very legendary aspect, and the evidence 
which supports it is exceptionally weak. Now, to him, 
this rejection may appear of no religious importance ; 
it may even seem to him unreasonable that men should 
make their view of Christ's character and function to 
depend upon the nature of his conception. Still, to the 
majority of Christians, the belief is so important — the 
gulf that divides those who hold it from those who 
reject it seems so great, that the confidence of a 
congregation in the veracity of their minister would 
be entirely ruined, if he avowed his disbelief in this 
doctrine and still continued to recite the Creed. And 
it seems to me, that a man who acts thus, can only 
justify himself by proving the most grave and urgent 
social necessity for his conduct. 

I have discussed the amount of belief imposed on 
a minister by prescribed formularies, apart from the 
consideration of the subscriptions or declarations that 



84 THE ETHICS OF 

he may have made on admission to his ministerial 
functions. If the duty of fideKty to engagements 
impose stricter bonds of dogma than the duty of 
veracious utterance, the discussion of the latter ceases 
to be practical. What the exact force of the new 
form of subscription, as imposed on the clergy by Mr. . 
Buxton's Bill, may be, I am not lawyer enough to decide; 
indeed, it may be said that the complete decision of 
the point lies still hidden in the breasts of our judges. 
But, as far as lean judge, the "general assent" expressly 
given by subscription, just corresponds to the general 
agreement which the mere fact of reading the service 
ought to involve. And it may be remarked, that in 
deciding cases of alleged heresy under the new Act, 
judges will have to solve the difficulty just now 
mentioned, of drawing the line at which particular 
dissent becomes incompatible with general assent ; 
which will be some compensation for the serious evils 
of such prosecutions. 

I am aware that it has been contended, that even 
under the old law the condition of more or less free- 
thinking clergymen was very endurable. " The legal 
obligation,*' it is said, " is the measure of the moral 
one; and the looseness of the legal obligation was 
shown by the impossibility of convicting the Essayists 
and Reviewers." Now, in one sense, I think it very im- 
portant to maintain, that the legal obligation is the 
measure of the moral one. Xhe formularies ought not 
to be regarded as of private interpretation ; the sense 
in which each individual assents to them is the sense in 



CONFORMITY AND SUBSCRIPTION. 85 

which they are commonly understood ; and the inter- 
pretation put on them by a Law Court must be taken as 
an authorized declaration of the common understand- 
ing. And no doubt there are important points, such 
as the inspiration of Scripture, where the liberty allowed 
by the formularies turns out to be much greater than 
was supposed. But any one who will study the principles 
of interpretation and judgment — ^the major premises 
of the judicial syllogism — as laid down by the Privy 
Council in the Gorham case, will, I think, convince 
himself that the cause of the acquittal of the Essayists 
and Seviewers was, not that the opinions communicated 
by their writings to most readers proved to be consis- 
tent with the formularies, but that it was impossible 
to obtain the complete proof required that they had 
explicitly expressed these opinions. Now, if by say- 
ing that the legal obligation is the measure of the 
moral one, it is meant that a man cannot be guilty of 
having broken an engagement unless he can be con- 
victed by a Court of having done so, the principle 
is hardly one which we can wish the guardians of 
social morality to maintain. 

It is said, however, that just as the legal restrictions 
on clerical teaching are practically relaxed by the diffi- 
culty of conviction, so the moral obligation has become 
gradually lighter through a tacit general understanding. 
And no doubt there is such a tacit understanding, only, 
unfortunately, it is by no means a general one. It is 
confined to the liberal clergy and a certain small 
number of educated laymen who sympathize with ^^'^^^ 



36 THE ETHICS OP 

difficult position. It is an understanding to wliich they 
dare not pubKcly appeal in favour of a dissent which 
they dare not openly avow. . Some relaxation, a certain 
limited dissent, would be admitted by all sensible per- 
sons ; it is difficult to draw a line, and some persons 
interested take advantage of the difficulty to draw it 
in their own favour, at a vast distance from the place 
that common sense vaguely contemplates. In many 
other professions we find a similar tendency towards an 
esoteric standard of professional morality. The advo- 
cate who urges for his client what he knows to be false ; 
the politician who bribes with shut eyes and intimidates 
without a threatening gesture; the tradesman whose 
wares are not what they seem, — can similarly appeal to 
a sort of common understanding which legitimates their 
conduct, the public opinion of their particular section 
of the public. And just as, by the simple populace, a 
lawyer has been roughly called a liar, and a tradesman 
a rogue, so to the priesthood has been attributed a dis- 
position to practise solemn imposture. But surely if 
this esoteric morality is an evil anywhere, it is a disas- 
trous evil in the profession whose function it is to pro- 
pagate morality. A distinguished politician* lately 
declared, that he attributed the decay of commercial 
integrity partly to the way in which honourable and 
conscientious men had taught themselves to play fast 
and loose with solemn obligations. 

Hoc fonte derivata clades 
In patriam populumqne floxit. 

* Mr. W. E. Forster. 



CONFORMITY AND SUBSCRIPTION, . 87 

Without going so far as this, it must he allowed that 
we look to the clergy to maintain the standard of, at 
any rate, the peaceful virtues ; and that it is a serious 
hlow to the spiritual interests of the country, that any 
considerahle and respectable section of them should be 
charged with habitual unveracity and be unable to 
refute the charge. 

The reply made to all this is simple, and certainly 
forcible : it is said, that this strict interpretation of 
clerical engagements would impose on the educated 
clergy a burden so intolerable, tha^ no abstract argu- 
ments will induce men to bear it.j^he more familiar a 
man becomes with the present state of theology, the 
more he endeavours to assimilate the results of recent 
research, and understand the controversies which are 
now being carried on, the more he will find that 
there is no sort of agreement among theologians in 
respect of principles, method, or conclusions ; that there 
is a complete scale of opinions, reaching from the 
extreme of mediaeval orthodoxy to the extreme of pure 
Theism, each separated from the other by a small 
interval, or shading imperceptibly into it ; all held by 
men of undoubted learning, ability, and character, and 
almost all by men of apparent fervour and piety, and 
declared attachment to the religion of Christ. In front 
of this scale we now place an intelligent and promising 
young clergyman ; we impress on him the need which 
the Church has of a learned clergy ; we bid him read, 
study, investigate; we encourage him (as his better 
nature prompts him) to respect learning and sincerity 



88 THE ETHICS OF 

wherever he finds them, and to weigh arguments with 
the single desire to be conyinced of the truth. But 
we inform him, that if Truth should appear to him to 
lie anywhere below a certain line drawn rather high up 
in the scale, honour and duty call upon him to with- 
draw from his ministerial functions, resign the prospects 
of his career, uproot himself from a position where he 
may feel that his means of exercising good influence are 
daily growing, allow his acquired faculties of special 
work to become useless, and, amid the distress of his 
friends and kindred, with his abandoned profession 
hanging like a weight round his neck, endeavour, late in 
life, to learn some new work by which he may live. We 
will assume that such a man, before ordination, has been 
brought, by a use of the proper text-books, to the exact 
official creed of Anglican clergymen. But how can 
he ever be sure that his study, as it increases in com- 
prehensiveness, will still point steadily to this complex 
of conclusions? And what man will study with such a 
sword of Damocles suspended over his desk ? No one 
will venture '^to be ordained except those who are too 
fanatical or too stupid to doubt that they will always be- 
lieve exactly what they believed at twenty-three^^nd can 
it be borne that the immense power which^he Church 
[of England; must necessarily wield for good or for evil 
should be entirely in the hands of such men as these ? 
This prospect is certainly one in which no reflective 
person — of those, at any rate, who are likely to read 
this pamphlet — will willingly acquiesce. Let us strain 
every nerve to avoid it, only let it be by openly relasdng 



CONFORMITY AND SUBSCBIPTION. 89 

the engagements, not by secretly tampering with their 
obligation. I am confident of ultimate success in such 
a cause, if we only fight with fair weapons. Until we 
do so, I feel that we scarcely deserve to succeed, "We 
cannot get people to take a strong interest in grievances 
by which no one will declare himself aggrieved; to 
remove burdens under which those who ought to feel 
them most galling appear perfectly comfortable. As 
it is, the present state of things, misrepresented and 
misunderstood, is actually made the subject of mutual 
congratulations — in many instances perfectly sincere. 
"What a church is mine,'* thinks many a contemplative 
layman, of generous sympathies, but vague theological 
conceptions ; "so orthodox, and yet so liberal ; so 
definite, and yet so comprehensive ; so able to retain 
the old, and yet not reject the new ; so adorned with 
divines of the most various tendencies and habits of 
thought, some clinging closely to the traditions of the 
past, others sympathizing with every movement of 
modem thought, yet all, of course, substantially agreed; 
exaggerating, perhaps, their little differences, somewhat 
bitter about the trifles that separate them, occasionally 
even fretting at the indulgence of the Church that 
gathers them all within her ample embrace, — ^yet all 
loyal to her, all prepared at any moment to recite her 
fine old creeds, and sign her carefully constructed 
Articles.*' If the hoUowness of this dream of harmony 
could be shown, even with some emphasis, some 
rudeness of shock ; if the actual state of opinion could 
be freely declared^ and its consequences frankly faced ; 



40 THE ETHICS OF CONFORMITY AND SUBSCRIPTION. 

then we might fairly try what the spirit of compromise 
and conciliation, which, after all, is a virtue and not a 
vice of the Church of England, could do towards har- 
monizing the inevitable conditions of a national ministry 
with the inexorable demands of theological thought. 



9 



Woodfall and Kinder Printers, Milford Lane, Strand, London W.O. 



H, 



c- 



I 



