:OJ 



ICO 
:LO 
?(&gt; 
ICO 



CD 



CO 



I 



Lenin, Vladimir Il f ich 
The state 




V.I.LENIN 



THE STATE 



PROGRESS PUBLISHERS 



Workers of All Countries, Unite! 



V. I. Lenin 



The State 

A Lecture Delivered 

at the Swerdlov University 

July 11, 1919 1 



Progress Publishers Moscow 

*" /. 



PUBLISHERS NOTE 

This translation of V. I. Lenin s lecture The State has 
been made from the text given in the Works of 
V. I. Lenin, Vol. 29, Fourth Russian Edition, prepared 
by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C.C., 
C.P.S.U. 



i-Y 



Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 



Comrades, according to your plan which has been con- 
eyed to me, the subject of today s talk is the state. I do 
lot know how familiar you are already with this subject, 
f I am not mistaken your courses have only just begun 
md this is the first time you will be approaching this sub- 
ect systematically. If that is so, then it may very well be 
hat in the first lecture on this difficult subject I may not 
succeed in making my exposition sufficiently clear and 
omprehensible to many of my listeners. And if this should 
)rove to be the case, I would request you not to be per- 
urbed by the fact, because the question of the state is a 
nost complex and difficult one, perhaps one that more than 
my other has been confused by bourgeois scholars, writers 
md philosophers. It should not therefore be expected that 
i thorough understanding of this subject can be obtained 
rom one brief talk, at a first sitting. After the first talk 
)n this subject you should make a note of the passages 
vhich you have not understood or which are not clear to 
/ou, and return to them a second, a third and a fourth 
:ime, so that what you have not understood may be further 
supplemented and elucidated later, both by reading and by 
various lectures and talks. I hope that we may manage to 
neet once again and that we shall then be able to exchange 
&gt;pinions on all supplementary questions and see what has 
emained most unclear. I also hope that in addition to talks 
md lectures you will devote some time to reading at least 
;ome of the most important works of Marx and Engels. I 
lave no doubt that these most important works are to be 
ound in catalogues of literature and in the handbooks. 



which are available in your library for the students of thcl 
Soviet and Party school; and although, again, some of yoif 
may at first be dismayed by the difficulty of the exposition { 
I must again warn you that you should not be perturbec? 
by this fact; what is unclear at a first reading will become* 
clear at a second reading, or when you subsequently! 
approach the question from a somewhat different angle.l 
For I once more repeat that the question is so complex and 
has been so confused by bourgeois scholars and writers] 
that anybody who desires to study it seriously and masterj 
it independently must attack it several times, return to it; 
again and again and consider it from various angles inj 
order to attain a clear and firm understanding of it. And itj 
will be all the easier to return to this question because it 
is such a fundamental, such a basic question of all politics, 
and because not only in such stormy and revolutionary 
times as the present, but even in the most peaceful times, 
you will come across it every day in any newspaper in 
Connection with any economic or political question. Every 
day, in one connection or another, you will be returning] 
to the question: what is the state, what is its nature, what 
is its significance and what is the attitude of our Party, 
the party that is fighting for the overthrow of capitalism, 
the Communist Party what is its attitude to the state? 
And the chief thing is that as a result of your reading, as 
a result of the talks and lectures you will hear on the state, 
you should acquire the ability to approach this question 
independently, since you will be meeting with it on the 
most diverse occasions, in connection with the most trifling 
questions, in the most unexpected conjunctures, and in 
discussions and disputes with opponents. Only when you 
learn to find your way about independently in this question 
may you consider yourself sufficiently confirmed in your 
convictions and able with sufficient success to defend them 
against anybody and at any time. 

After these brief remarks, I shall proceed to deal with 
the question itself what is the state, how did it arise and 
what fundamentally should be the attitude to the state of 



the party of the working class, which is fighting for the 
complete overthrow of capitalism the Communist Party? 
I have already said that you will scarcely find another 
question which has been so confused, deliberately and 
unwittingly, by representatives of bourgeois science, philos 
ophy, jurisprudence, political economy and journalism, as 
the question of the state. To this day it is very often con 
fused with religious questions; not only those professing 
religious doctrines (it is quite natural to expect it of them), 
but even people who consider themselves free from reli 
gious prejudice, very often confuse the specific question of 
the state with questions of religion and endeavour to build 
up a doctrine very often a complex one, with an ideolog 
ical, philosophical approach and argumentation which 
claims that the state is something divine, something super 
natural, that it is a certain force by virtue of which man 
kind has lived, and which confers on people, or which can 
confer on people, which brings with it, something that is 
not of man, but is given him from without that it is 
a force of divine origin. And it must be said that this doc 
trine is so closely bound up with the interests of the exploit 
ing classes the landowners and the capitalists so serves 
their interests, has so deeply permeated all the customs, 
views and science of the gentlemen who represent the 
bourgeoisie, that you will meet with relics of it on every 
hand, even in the view of the state held by the Mensheviks 
and Socialist-Revolutionaries, who reject with disgust the 
suggestion that they are under the sway of religious preju 
dices and are convinced that they can regard the state with 
sober eyes. This question has been so confused and compli 
cated because it affects the interests of the ruling classes 
more than any other question (yielding in this respect only 
to the foundations of economic science). The doctrine of 
the state serves as a justification of social privilege, a 
justification of the existence of exploitation, a justification 
of the existence of capitalism and that is why it would 
be the greatest mistake to expect impartiality on this 
question, to approach it in the belief that people who claim 



to be scientific can give you a purely scientific view or 
the subject. In the question of the state, in the doctrine o 
the state, in the theory of the state, when you have become 
familiar with it and have gone into it deeply enough, yoi 
will always discern the struggle between different classes 
a struggle which is reflected or expressed in a conflict ol 
views on the state, in the estimate of the role and sig 
nificance of the state. 

To approach this question as scientifically as possible 
we must cast at least a fleeting glance back on the history 
of the rise and development of the state. The most reliable 
thing in a question of social science, and one that is most 
necessary in order really to acquire the habit of approaching 
this question correctly and not allowing oneself to get lost 
in the mass of detail or in the immense variety of con 
flicting opinions the most important thing in order to 
approach this question scientifically is not to forget the 
underlying historical connection, to examine every question 
from the standpoint of how the given phenomenon arose in 
history and what principal stages this phenomenon passed 
through in its development, and, from the standpoint of 
its development, to examine what it has become today. 

I hope that in connection with the question of the state 
you will acquaint yourselves with Engels s book, The 
Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State. This 
is one of the fundamental works of modern socialism, 
every sentence of which can be accepted with confidence, 
in the assurance that it has not been said at random but 
is based on immense historical and political material. 
Undoubtedly, not all the parts of this work have been 
expounded in an equally popular and comprehensible way; 
some of them presume a reader who already prossesses a 
certain knowledge of history and economics. But I again 
repeat that you should not be perturbed if on reading this 
work you do not understand it at once. Scarcely anybody 
does. But returning to it later, when your interest has been 
aroused, you will succeed in understanding the greater 
part, if not the whole of it. I refer to this book because it 



gives the correct approach to the question in the sense 
mentioned. It begins with a historical sketch of the origin 
of the state. 

This question, as every other question for example, that 
of the origin of capitalism, the exploitation of man by man, 
socialism, how socialism arose, what conditions gave rise 
to it can be approached correctly, soundly and confidently 
only if we cast a glance back on the history of its develop 
ment as a whole. In connection with this problem, it should 
first of all be noted that the state has not always existed. 
There was a time when there was no state. It appears wher 
ever and whenever a division of society into classes 
appears, whenever exploiters and exploited appear. 

Before the first form of exploitation of man by man 
arose, the first form of division into classes slaveowners 
and slaves there existed the patriarchal family, or, as it 
is sometimes called, the clan family. (Clan tribe; at the 
time people of one kin lived together.) Fairly definite traces 
of these primitive times have survived in the life of many 
primitive peoples; and if you take any work whatsoever 
on primitive civilisation, you will always come across more 
or less definite descriptions, indications and recollections 
of the fact that there was a time, more or less similar to 
primitive communism, when the division of society into 
slaveowners and slaves did not exist. And in those times 
there was no state, no special apparatus for the systematic 
application of force and the subjugation of people by force. 
It is such an apparatus that is called the state. 

In primitive society, when people lived in small family 
groups and were still at the lowest stages of development, 
in a condition approximating to savagery an epoch from 
which modern, civilised human society is separated by 
several thousands of years there were yet no signs of 
the existence of a state. We find the predominance of 
custom, authority, respect, the power enjoyed by the elders 
of the clan; we find this power sometimes accorded to 
women the position of women then was not like the 
downtrodden and oppressed condition of women today 



but nowhere do we find a special category of people set 
apart to rule others and, who, for the sake and purpose of 
rule, systematically and permanently have at their disposal 
a certain apparatus of coercion, an apparatus of violence, 
such as is represented at the present time, as you all 
realise, by armed contingents of troops, prisons and other 
means of subjugating the will of others by force all that 
which constitutes the essence of the state. 

If we get away from the so-called religious teachings, 
subtleties, philosophical arguments and the various 
opinions advanced by bourgeois scholars, if we get away 
from these and try to get at the real essence of the matter, 
we shall find that the state really does amount to such an 
apparatus of rule which separates itself from human 
society. When there appears such a special group of men 
who are occupied solely with government, and who in 
order to rule need a special apparatus of coercion, an 
apparatus to subjugate the will of others by force prisons, 
special contingents of men, armies, etc. then there 
appears the state. 

But there was a time when there was no state, when 
general ties, society itself, discipline and the ordering of 
work were maintained by custom and tradition, or by the 
authority or the respect enjoyed by the elders of the clan 
or by women who in those times not only frequently 
enjoyed a status equal to that of men, but not infrequently 
enjoyed an even higher status and when there was no 
special category of persons, specialists in ruling. History 
shows that the state as a special apparatus for coercing 
people arose only wherever and whenever there appeared 
a division of society into classes, that is, a division into 
groups of people some of which are permanently in a 
position to appropriate the labour of others, where some 
people exploit others. 

And this division of society into classes must always be 
clearly borne in mind as a fundamental fact of history. 
The development of all human societies for thousands of 
years, in all countries without exception, reveals a general 

5 



conformity to law, a regularity and consistency; so that at 
first we had a society without classes the original patri 
archal, primitive society, in which there were no aristocrats; 
then we had a society based on slavery a slave-owning 
society. The whole of modern, civilised Europe has passed 
through this stage slavery ruled supreme two thousand 
years ago. The vast majority of peoples of the other parts 
of the world also passed through this stage. Among the 
less developed peoples traces of slavery survive to this 
day; you will find the institution of slavery in Africa, for 
example, at the present time. The division into slave- 
owners and slaves was the first important class division. 
The former group not only owned all the means of produc 
tion the land and the implements, however poor and 
primitive they may have been in those times but also 
owned people. This group was known as slaveowners, while 
those who laboured and supplied labour for others were 
known as slaves. 

This form was followed in history by another feudalism. 
In the great majority of countries slavery in the course of 
its development evolved into serfdom. The fundamental 
division of society was now into feudal lords and peasant 
serfs. The form of relations between people changed. The 
slaveowners had regarded the slaves as their property; the 
law had confirmed this view and regarded the slave as a 
chattel completely owned by the slaveowner. As far as the 
peasant serf was concerned, class oppression and depend 
ence remained, but it was not considered- that the feudal 
lord owned the peasants as chattels, but that he was only 
entitled to their labour, to the obligatory performance of 
certain service. In practice, as you know, serfdom, especial 
ly in Russia where it survived longest of all and assumed 
the grossest forms, in no way differed from slavery. 

Further, with the development of trade, the appearance^ 
of the world market and the development of money circu 
lation, a new class arose within feudal society the capital 
ist class. From the commodity, the exchange of commod 
ities and the rise of the power of money, there arose the 

2-2694 9 



power of capital. During the eighteenth century, or rather, 
from the end of the eighteenth century and during the 
nineteenth century, revolutions took place all over the 
world. Feudalism was eliminated in all the countries of 
Western Europe. Russia was the last country in which this 
took place. In 1861 a radical change took place in Russia 
as well, as a consequence of which one form of society 
was replaced by another feudalism was replaced by 
capitalism, under which division into classes remained, as 
well as various traces and relics of serfdom, but funda 
mentally the division into classes assumed a different form. 

The owners of capita], the owners of the land, the owners 
of the factories in all capitalist countries constituted and 
still constitute an insignificant minority of the population 
who have complete command of the labour of the whole 
people, and, consequently, command, oppress and exploit 
the whole mass of labourers, the majority of whom are 
proletarians, wage-workers, who procure their livelihood in 
the process of production only by the sale of their own 
worker s hands, their labour -power. With the transition to 
capitalism, the peasants, who had been disunited and 
downtrodden in feudal times, were converted partly (the 
majority) into proletarians, and partly (the minority) into 
wealthy peasants who themselves hired labourers and who 
constituted a rural bourgeoisie. 

This fundamental fact the transition of society from 
primitive forms of slavery to serfdom and finally to 
capitalism you must always bear in mind, for only by 
remembering this fundamental fact, only by inserting all 
political doctrines into this fundamental framework will 
you be able properly to appraise these doctrines and 
understand what they refer to; for each of these great 
periods in the history of mankind, slave-owning, feudal 
and capitalist, embraces scores and hundreds of centuries 
and presents such a mass of political forms, such a variety 
of political doctrines, opinions and revolutions, that this 
extreme diversity and immense variety (especially in 
connection with the political, philosophical and other 

10 



doctrines of bourgeois scholars and politicians) can be 
understood only by firmly holding, as to a guiding thread, 
to this division of society into classes, this change in the 
forms of class rule, and from this standpoint examining 
all social questions economic, political, spiritual, religious, 
etc. 

If you examine the state from the standpoint of this 
fundamental division, you will find that before the division 
of society into classes, as I have already said, no state 
existed. But as the social division into classes arose and 
took firm root, as class society arose, the state also arose 
and took firm root. The history of mankind knows scores 
and hundreds of countries that have passed through or are 
still passing through slavery, feudalism and capitalism. Tn 
each of these countries, despite the immense historical 
changes that have taken place, despite all the political 
vicissitudes and all the revolutions due to this develop 
ment of mankind, to the transition from slavery through 
feudalism to capitalism and to the present world-wide 
struggle against capitalism, you will always discern the rise 
of the state. It has always been a certain apparatus which 
stood outside society and consisted of a group of people 
engaged solely, or almost solely, or mainly, in ruling. 
People are divided into ruled and into specialists in ruling, 
those who rise above society and are called rulers, states 
men. This apparatus, this group of people who rule others, 
always possesses a certain apparatus of coercion, of 
physical force, irrespective of whether this violence over 
people is expressed in the primitive club, or, in the epoch 
of slavery, in more perfected types of weapons, or in the 
firearms which appeared in the Middle Ages, or, finally, in 
modern weapons, which in the twentieth century are 
marvels of technique and are based entirely on the latest 
achievements of modern technology. The methods of vio 
lence changed, but whenever there was a state there 
existed in every society a group of persons who ruled, who 
commanded, who dominated and who in order to maintain 
their power possessed an apparatus of physical coercion, 

2* // 



an apparatus of violence, with those weapons which cor 
responded to the technical level of the given epoch. And by 
examining these general phenomena, by asking ourselves 
why no state existed when there were no classes, when 
there were no exploiters and exploited, and why it arose 
when classes arose only in this way shall we find a 
definite answer to the question of what is the essence of 
the state and its significance. 

The state is a machine for maintaining the rule of one 
class over another. When there were no classes in society, 
when, before the epoch of slavery, people laboured in prim 
itive conditions of greater equality, in conditions when 
the productivity of labour was still at its lowest, and when 
primitive man could barely procure the wherewithal for the 
crudest and most primitive existence, a special group of 
people, specially separated off to rule and dominate over 
the rest of society, had not, and could not yet have 
emerged. Only when the first form of the division of 
society into classes appeared, only when slavery appeared, 
when a certain class of people, by concentrating on the 
crudest forms of agricultural labour, could produce a cer 
tain surplus, when this surplus was not absolutely essential 
for the most wretched existence of the slave and passed 
into the hands of the slaveowner, when in this way the 
existence of this class of slaveowners took firm root then 
in order that it might take firm root it was essential that 
a state should appear. 

And it did appear the slave-owning state, and appa 
ratus which gave the slaveowners power and enabled them 
to rule over the slaves. Both society and the state were 
then much smaller than they are now, they possessed an 
incomparably weaker apparatus of communication the 
modern means of communication did not then exist. 
Mountains, rivers and seas were immeasurably greater ob 
stacles than they are now, and the state took shape within 
far narrower geographical boundaries. A technically weak 
state apparatus served a state confined within relatively 
narrow boundaries and a narrow range of action. Never- 

12 



theless, there did exist an apparatus which compelled the 
slaves to remain in slavery, which kept one part of society 
subjugated to and oppressed by another. It is impossible 
to compel the greater part of society to work systemati 
cally for the other part of society without a permanent 
apparatus of coercion. So long as there were no classes, 
there was no apparatus like this. When classes appeared, 
everywhere and always as this division grew and took 
firmer hold, there also appeared a special institution the 
state. The forms of state were extremely varied. During 
the period of slavery we already find diverse forms of the 
state in the countries that were the most advanced, cul 
tured and civilised according to the standards of the time 
for example, in ancient Greece and Rome which were 
based entirely on slavery. At that time the difference was 
already arising between the monarchy and the republic, 
between the aristocracy and the democracy. A monarchy 
is the power of a single person, a republic is the absence 
of any non-elected authority; an aristocracy is the power 
of a relatively small minority, a democracy is the power 
of the people (democracy in Greek literally means the 
power of the people). All these differences arose in the 
epoch of slavery. Despite these differences, the state of 
the slave-owning epoch was a slave-owning state, irrespec 
tive of whether it was a monarchy or a republic, aristocratic 
or democratic. 

In every course on the history of ancient times, in any 
lecture on this subject, you will hear about the struggle 
which was waged between the monarchical and republican 
states. But the fundamental fact is that the slaves were not 
regarded as human beings not only were they not regard 
ed as citizens, they were not even regarded as human 
beings. Roman law regarded them as chattels. The law of 
manslaughter, not to mention the other laws for the pro 
tection of the person, did not extend to slaves. It defended 
only the slaveowners, who were alone recognised as citi 
zens with full rights. But whether a monarchy was insti 
tuted or a republic, it was a monarchy of the slaveowners 

13 



or a republic of the slaveowners. All rights were enjoyed 
by the slaveowners, while the slave was a chattel in the 
eyes of the laws; and not only could any sort of violence 
be perpetrated against a slave, but even the killing of a 
slave was not considered a crime. Slave-owning republics 
differed in their internal organisation; there were aristocrat 
ic republics and democratic republics. In an aristocratic 
republic only a small number of privileged persons took 
part in the elections; in a democratic republic everybody 
took part but everybody meant only the slaveowners, 
that is, everybody except the slaves. This fundamental fact 
must be borne in mind, because it throws more light than 
any other on the question of the state and clearly demon 
strates the nature of the state. 

The state is a machine for the oppression of one class 
by another, a machine for holding in obedience to one class 
other, subordinated classes. There are various forms of this 
machine. The slave-owning state could be a monarchy, an 
aristocratic republic or even a democratic republic. In fact 
the forms of government varied extremely, but their essence 
was always the same: the slaves enjoyed no rights and 
constituted an oppressed class; they were not regarded 
as human beings. We find the same thing in the feudal 
state. 

The change in the form of exploitation transformed the 
slave-owning state into the feudal state. This was of im 
mense importance. In slave-owning society the slave 
enjoyed no rights whatever and was not regarded as a 
human being; in feudal society the peasant was tied to the 
soil. The chief distinguishing feature of serfdom was that 
the peasants (and at that time the peasants constituted the 
majority; the urban population was still very small) were 
considered attached to the land hence the very concept 
serfdom. The peasant might work a definite number of 
days for himself on the plot assigned to him by the lord; 
on the other days the peasant serf worked for his lord. 
The essence of class society remained: society was based 
on class exploitation. Only the landlords could enjoy full 

14 



rights; the peasants had no rights at all. In practice their 
condition differed very little from the condition of slaves 
in the slave-owning state. Nevertheless a wider road was 
opened for their emancipation, for the emancipation of the 
peasants, since the peasant serf was not regarded as the 
direct property of the landlord. He could work part of his 
time on his own plot, could, so to speak, belong to himself 
to some extent; and with the wider opportunities for the 
development of exchange and trade relations the feudal 
system steadily disintegrated and the scope of emancipa 
tion of the peasantry steadily widened. Feudal society was 
always more complex than slave society. There was a 
greater element of development of trade and industry, 
which even in those days led to capitalism. In the Middle 
Ages feudalism predominated. And here too the forms of 
state varied, here too we find both the monarchy and the 
republic, although the latter was much more weakly ex 
pressed. But always the feudal landlord was regarded as 
the only ruler. The peasant serfs were absolutely excluded 
from all political rights. 

Neither under slavery nor under the feudal system could 
a small minority of people dominate over the vast majority 
without coercion. History is full of the constant attempts 
of the oppressed classes to throw off oppression. The 
history of slavery contains records of wars of emancipa 
tion from slavery which lasted for decades. Incidentally, 
the name "Spartacist" now adopted by the German Com 
munists the only German party which is really fighting 
the yoke of capitalism was adopted by them because 
Spartacus was one of the most prominent heroes of one 
of the greatest revolts of slaves, which took place about 
two thousand years ago. For many years the seemingly 
omnipotent Roman Empire, which rested entirely on 
slavery, experienced the shocks and blows of a widespread 
uprising of slaves who armed and united to form a vast 
army under the leadership of Spartacus. In the end they 
were defeated, captured and put to torture by the slave 
owners. Such civil wars mark the whole history of the 

15 



existence of class society. I have just mentioned an example 
of the greatest of these civil wars in the epoch of slavery. 
The whole epoch of feudalism is likewise marked by 
constant uprisings of the peasants. For example, in Ger 
many in the Middle Ages the struggle between the two 
classes the landlords and the serfs assumed wide pro 
portions and was transformed into a civil war of the 
peasants against the landlords. You are all familiar with 
similar examples of repeated uprisings of the peasants 
against the feudal landlords in Russia. 

In order to maintain their rule and to preserve their 
power, the landlords had to have an apparatus by which 
they could unite under their subjugation a vast number of 
people and subordinate them to certain laws and regula 
tions; and all these laws fundamentally amounted to one 
thing the maintenance of the power of the landlords over 
the peasant serfs. And this was the feudal state, which in 
Russia, for example, or in quite backward Asiatic countries 
(where feudalism prevails to this day) differed in form 
it was either a republic or a monarchy. When the state was 
a monarchy, the rule of one person was recognised; when 
it was a republic, the participation of the elected represent 
atives of landlord society was in one degree or another 
recognised this was in feudal society. Feudal society 
represented a division of classes under which the vast 
majority the peasant serfs were completely subjected 
to an insignificant minority the landlords, v/ho owned 
the land. 

The development of trade, the development of com 
modity exchange, led to the crystallisation of a new class 
the capitalists. Capital arose at the close of the Middle 
Ages, when, after the discovery of America, world trade 
developed enormously, when the quantity of precious 
metals increased, when silver and gold became the instru 
ment of exchange, when money circulation made it pos 
sible for individuals to possess tremendous wealth. Silver 
and gold were recognised as wealth all over the world. 
The economic power of the landlord class declined and the 

16 



power of the new class the representatives of capital 
developed. The reconstruction of society was such that 
all citizens seemed to be equal, the old division into slave 
owners and slaves disappeared, all were regarded as equal 
before the law irrespective of what capital each owned; 
whether he owned land as private property, or was a poor 
man who owned nothing but his labour power all were 
equal before the law. The law protects everybody equally; 
it protects the property of those who have it from attack 
by the masses who, possessing no property, possessing 
nothing but their labour power, grow steadily impoverished 
and ruined and become converted into proletarians. Such 
is capitalist society. 

I cannot dwell on it in detail. You will return to this 
when you come to discuss the programme of the Party 
you will then hear a description of capitalist society. This 
society advanced against serfdom, against the old feudal 
system, under the slogan of liberty. But it was liberty for 
those who owned property. And when feudalism was 
shattered, which occurred at the end of the eighteenth 
century and the beginning of the nineteenth century in 
Russia it occurred later than in other countries, in 1861 
the feudal state was then superseded by the capitalist state, 
which proclaims liberty for the whole people as its slogan, 
which declares that it expresses the will of the whole peo 
ple and denies that it is a class state. And here there de 
veloped a struggle between the socialists, who are fighting 
for the liberty of the whole people, and the capitalist state 
a struggle which has led to the creation of the Soviet 
Socialist Republic and which embraces the whole world. 

To understand the struggle that has been started against 
world capital, to understand the essence of the capitalist 
state, we must remember that when the capitalist state 
advanced against the feudal state it entered the fight under 
the slogan of liberty. The abolition of feudalism meant 
liberty for the representatives of the capitalist state and 
served their purpose, inasmuch as serfdom was breaking 
down and the peasants had acquired the opportunity of 

17 



owning as their full property the land which they had 
purchased for compensation or in part by quit rent this 
did not concern the state: it protected property irrespective 
of its origin, because the state was founded on private 
property. The peasants became private owners in all the 
modern, civilised states. Even when the landlord surren 
dered part of his land to the peasant, the state protected 
private property, rewarding the landlord by compensation, 
by letting him take money for the land. The state as it 
were declared that it would fully preserve private prop 
erty, and it accorded it every support and protection. The 
state recognised the property rights of every merchant, 
industrialist and manufacturer. And this society, based on 
private property, on the power of capital, on the complete 
subjection of the propertyless workers and labouring 
masses of the peasantry, proclaimed that its rule was based 
on liberty. Combating feudalism, it proclaimed freedom of 
property and was particularly proud of the fact that the 
state had ceased, supposedly, to be a class state. 

Yet the state continued to be a machine which helped 
the capitalists to hold the poor peasants and the working 
class in subjection. But in outward appearance it was free. 
It proclaimed universal suffrage, and declared through its 
champions, preachers, scholars and philosophers, that it was 
not a class state. Even now, when the Soviet Socialist Re 
publics have begun to fight it, they accuse us of violating 
liberty, of building a state based on coercion, on the sup 
pression of some by others, whereas they represent a 
popular, democratic state. And now, when the world 
socialist revolution has begun, and when the revolution has 
succeeded in some countries, when the fight against world 
capital has grown particularly acute, this question of the 
state has acquired the greatest importance and has become, 
one might say, the most burning one, the focus of all 
present-day political questions and political disputes. 

Whatever party we take in Russia or in any of the more 
civilised countries, we find that nearly all political dis 
putes, disagreements and opinions now centre around the 

18 



conception of the state. Is the state in a capitalist country, 
in a democratic republic especially one like Switzerland 
or the U.S.A. in the freest democratic republics, an ex 
pression of the popular will, the sum total of the general 
decision of the people, the expression of the national will, 
and so forth; or is the state a machine that enables the 
capitalists of those countries to maintain their power over 
the working class and the peasantry? That is the funda 
mental question around which all political disputes all over 
the world now centre. What do they say about Bolshevism? 
The bourgeois press abuses the Bolsheviks. You will not 
find a single newspaper that does not repeat the 
hackneyed accusation that the Bolsheviks violate popular 
rule. If our Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries in 
their simplicity of heart (perhaps it is not simplicity, or 
perhaps it is the simplicity which the proverb says is worse 
than robbery) think that they discovered and invented the 
accusation that the Bolsheviks have violated liberty and 
popular rule, they are ludicrously mistaken. Today every 
one of the richest newspapers in the richest countries, 
which spend tens of millions on their distribution and 
disseminate bourgeois lies and imperialist policy in tens of 
millions of copies every one of these newspapers repeats 
these basic arguments and accusations against Bolshevism, 
namely, that the U.S.A., Britain and Switzerland are 
advanced states based on popular rule, whereas the 
Bolshevik Republic is a state of bandits in which liberty is 
unknown, and that the Bolsheviks have violated the idea 
of popular rule and have even gone so far as to disperse 
the Constituent Assembly. These terrible accusations 
against the Bolsheviks are repeated all over the world. 
These accusations bring us fully up against the question 
what is the state? In order to understand these accusations, 
in order to examine them and have a fully intelligent at 
titude towards them, and not to examine them on hearsay 
but with a firm opinion of our own, we must have a clear 
idea of what the state is. Here we have capitalist states 
of every kind and all the theories in defence of them which 

19 



were created before the war. In order to answer the ques 
tion properly we must critically examine all these theories 
and views. 

I have already advised you to turn for help to Engels s 
book, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the 
State. This book says that every state in which private 
ownership of the land and means of production exists, in 
which capital dominates, however democratic it may be, 
is a capitalist state, a machine used by the capitalists to 
keep the working class and the poor peasants in subjec 
tion; while universal suffrage, a constituent assembly, a 
parliament are merely a form, a sort of promissory note,, 
which does not alter the essence of the matter. 

The forms of domination of the state may vary: capital 
manifests its power in one way where one form exists,, 
and in another way where another form exists but es 
sentially the power is in the hands of capital, whether 
there are voting qualifications or some other rights or not,, 
or whether the republic is a democratic one or not in fact, 
the more democratic it is the cruder and more cynical is 
the rule of capitalism. One of the most democratic republics 
in the world is the United States of America, yet nowhere 
(and those who have been there since 1905 probably know 
it) is the power of capital, the power of a handful of multi 
millionaires over the whole of society, so crude and so 
openly corrupt as in America. Once capital exists, it 
dominates the whole of society, and no democratic repub 
lic, no franchise can change it in essence. 

The democratic republic and universal suffrage were an 
immense progressive advance on feudalism: they have 
enabled the proletariat to achieve its present unity and 
solidarity, to form those firm and disciplined ranks which 
are waging a systematic struggle against capital. There 
was nothing even approximately resembling this among 
the peasant serfs, not to speak of the slaves. The slaves, 
as we know, revolted, rioted, started civil wars, but they 
could never create a class-conscious majority and parties, 
to lead the struggle, they could not clearly realise what 

20 



their aims were, and even in the most revolutionary 
moments of history they were always pawns in the hands 
of the ruling classes. The bourgeois republic, parliament, 
universal suffrage all represent great progress from the 
standpoint of the world development of society. Mankind 
moved towards capitalism, and it was capitalism alone 
which, thanks to urban culture, enabled the oppressed 
proletarian class to learn to know itself and to create the 
world working-class movement, the millions of workers 
organised all over the world in parties the socialist 
parties which are consciously leading the struggle of the 
masses. Without parliamentarism, without an electoral 
system, this development of the working class would have 
been impossible. That is why all these things have acquired 
such great importance in the eyes of the broad masses of 
people. That is why a radical change seems to be so 
difficult. It is not only the conscious hypocrites, scientists 
and priests that uphold and defend the bourgeois lie that 
the state is free and that it is its mission to defend the 
interests of all; so also do a large number of people who 
sincerely adhere to the old prejudices and who cannot 
understand the transition from the old, capitalist society 
to socialism. Not only people who are directly dependent 
on the bourgeoisie, not only those who live under the yoke 
of capital or who have been bribed by capital (there are a 
large number of all sorts of scientists, artists, priests, etc., 
in the service of capital), but even people who are simply 
under the sway of the prejudice of bourgeois liberty, have 
taken up arms against Bolshevism all over the world 
because when Soviet Republic was founded it rejected 
these bourgeois lies and openly declared: you say your 
state is free, whereas in reality, as long as there is private 
property, your state, even if it is a democratic republic, 
is nothing but a machine used by the capitalists to suppress 
the workers, and the freer the state, the more clearly is 
this expressed. Examples of this are Switzerland in Europe 
and the United States in America. Nowhere does capital 
rule so cynically and ruthlessly, and nowhere is it so clear- 

21 



ly apparent, as in these countries, although they are demo 
cratic republics, no matter how finely they are painted and 
notwithstanding all the talk about labour democracy and 
the equality of all citizens. The fact is that in Switzerland 
and the United States capital dominates, and every at 
tempt of the workers to achieve the slightest real improve 
ment in their condition is immediately met by civil war. 
There are fewer soldiers, a smaller standing army, in these 
countries Switzerland has a militia and every Swiss has 
a gun at home, while in America there was no standing 
army until quite recently and so when there is a strike 
the bourgeoisie arms, hires soldiery and suppresses the 
strike; and nowhere is the suppression of the working-class 
movement accompanied by such ruthless severity as in 
Switzerland and the U.S.A., and nowhere does the in 
fluence of capital in parliament manifest itself as powerfully 
as in these countries. The power of capital is everything, 
the stock exchange is everything, while parliament and 
elections are marionettes, puppets. . . . But the eyes of the 
workers are being opened more and more, and the idea of 
Soviet government is spreading farther and farther afield,, 
especially after the bloody carnage through which we have 
just passed. The necessity for a relentless war on the 
capitalists is becoming clearer and clearer to the work 
ing class. 

Whatever guise a republic may assume, however demo 
cratic it may be, if it is a bourgeois republic, if it retains 
private ownership of the land and factories, and if private 
capital keeps the whole of society in wage slavery, that is, 
if the republic does not carry out what is proclaimed in 
the programme of our Party and in the Soviet Constitu 
tion, then this state is a machine for the suppression of 
some people by others. And we shall place this machine 
in the hands of the class that is to overthrow the power 
of capital. We shall reject all the old prejudices about the 
state meaning universal equality for that is a fraud: as 
long as there is exploitation there cannot be equality. The 
landlord cannot be the equal of the worker, or the hungry 

22 



man the equal of the full man. The machine which was 
called the state and before which people bowed in supersti 
tious awe, believing the old tales that it meant popular 
rule the proletariat rejects that machine and says those 
are bourgeois lies the proletariat will smash this machine. 
So far we have deprived the capitalists of this machine and 
have taken it over. We shall use this machine, or bludgeon, 
to destroy all exploitation. And when the possibility of 
exploitation no longer exists anywhere in the world, when 
there are no longer owners of land and owners of factories, 
and when there is no longer a situation in which some 
;orge while others starve only when the possibility of 
this no longer exists shall we consign this machine to the 
scrap heap. Then there will be no state and no exploitation. 
Such is the view of our Communist Party. I hope that we 
shall return to this subject in subsequent lectures, and 
return to it again and again. 

First published January 18, 1929, 
Pravda No. 15 



NOTE 

1 The Y. M. Sverd/ov Communist University was constituted 
from the courses for Propagandists and Instructors established in 
1918 under the auspices of the All-Russia Central Executive Com 
mittee and subsequently reorganised as the School of Soviet Work. 
Following the decision of the Eighth Congress of the Russian Com 
munist Party (Bolsheviks) to organise a Senior School of the C.C. 
for the training of Party personnel, the School was reorganised as 
the Central School of Soviet and Party Work. In the latter half of 
1919, by decision of the Organising Bureau of the C.C. of the 
R.C.P.(B.) it was renamed the Y. M. Sverdlov Communist University. 
Lenin delivered two lectures on the state. There is no existing 
record of his second lecture, delivered on August 29, 1919. 



B. 11. JI EH M H 

O rOCVAAPCTBE 



JC 

268 

U53 



Lenin, Vladimir Ilich 
The state 




PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



