The ABC of Materialist Dialectics 

Leon Trotsky 
December 15th, 1939 

The ABC of Materialist Dialectics 

Dialectic is neither fiction nor mysticism, but a science of the forms of our 
thinking insofar as it is not limited to the daily problems of life but at- 
tempts to arrive at an understanding of more complicated and drawn-out 
processes. The dialectic and formal logic bear a relationship similar to that 
between higher and lower mathematics. 

I will here attempt to sketch the substance of the problem in a very concrete 
form. The Aristotelian logic of the simple syllogisrrr] starts from the propo- 
sition that 'A' is equal to 'Arl This postulate is accepted as an axiom for a 
multitude of practical human actions and elementary generalisations. But 
in reality 'A' is not equal to 'A'. This is easy to prove if we observe these two 
letters under a lens — they are quite different from each other. But, one can 
object, the question is not of the size or the form of the letters, since they 
are only symbols for equal quantities, for instance, a pound of sugar. The 
objection is beside the point; in reality a pound of sugar is never equal to a 
pound of sugar-a more delicate scale always discloses a difference. Again 
one can object: but a pound of sugar is equal to itself. Neither is this true-all 
bodies change uninterruptedly in size, weight, colour, etc. They are never 
equal to themselves. A sophist will respond that a pound of sugar is equal 
to itself 'at any given moment'. 



1 Syllogism: The historically first form of deduction, which consists of three "terms": In- 
dividual, Universal and Particular, arranged in three propositions forming two premises 
and a conclusion. Fido (Particular) is a dog (Individual). All dogs are quadrupeds (Uni- 
versal). Therefore, Fido is a quadruped. (conclusion), and each of the statements is called a 
"Judgment"). Hegel spent a lot time in the Doctrine of the Notion, developing the relation- 
ships between Individual, Universal and Particular, as part of his critique of formal logic. 
See the section in the Science Logic on the Syllogism. Hegel ridicules the idea of a "logic" 
which is indifferent to the truth of its premises, but only whether the conclusion follows 
from the premises: nothing could be deduced from a notion which has no content. 

2 Something being 'equal to itself means that despite quantitative change, it still remains 
what it is, i.e. there is no quantitative change. "Self-identical" in Hegelian terminology 
means something totally lacking in internal contradictions and vitality. 



2 The ABC of Materialist Dialectics 

Aside from the extremely dubious practical value of this 'axiom', it does 
not withstand theoretical criticism either. How should we really conceive 
the word 'moment'? If it is an infinitesimal interval of time, then a pound of 
sugar is subjected during the course of that 'moment' to inevitable changes. 
Or is the 'moment' a purely mathematical abstraction, that is, a zero of 
time? But everything exists in time; and existence itself is an uninterrupted 
process of transformation; time is consequently a fundamental element of 
existence. Thus the axiom 'A' is equal to 'A' signifies that a thing is equal 
to itself if it does not change, that is, if it does not exist. 

At first glance it could seem that these 'subtleties' are useless. In reality 
they are of decisive significance. The axiom 'A' is equal to 'A' appears on 
one hand to be the point of departure for all our knowledge, on the other 
hand the point of departure for all the errors in our knowledge. To make 
use of the axiom of 'A' is equal to 'A' with impunity is possible only within 
certain limits. When quantitative changes in 'A' are negligible for the task 
at hand then we can presume that 'A' is equal to 'A'. This is, for example, 
the manner in which a buyer and a seller consider a pound of sugar. We 
consider the temperature of the sun likewise. Until recently we consider 
the buying power of the dollar in the same way. But quantitative changes 
beyond certain limits become converted into qualitative. A pound of sugar 
subjected to the action of water or kerosene ceases to be a pound of sugar. 
A dollar in the embrace of a president ceases to be a dollar. To determine 
at the right moment the critical point where quantity changes into qualitMj 
is one of the most important and difficult tasks in all the spheres of knowl- 
edge including sociology. 

Every worker knows that it is impossible to make two completely equal 
objects. In the elaboration of baring-brass into cone bearings, a certain de- 
viation is allowed for the cones which should not, however, go beyond cer- 
tain limits (this is called tolerance). By observing the norms of tolerance, 
the cones are considered as being equal. ('A' is equal to 'A'). When the tol- 
erance is exceeded the quantity goes over into quality; in other words, the 



3 Quality and Quantity: Quality is an aspect of something by which it is what it is and not 
something else; quality reflects that which is stable amidst change. Quantity is an aspect of 
something which may change (become more or less) without the thing thereby becoming 
something else; quantity reflects that which is constantly changing in the world ("the more 
things change, the more they remain the same"). The quality of an object pertains to the 
whole, not one or another part of an object, since without that quality it would not be what 
it is, whereas an object can lose a "part" and still be what it is, minus the part. Quantity 
on the other hand is aspect of a thing by which it can (mentally or really) be broken up 
into its parts (or degrees) and be re-assembled again. Thus, if something changes in such a 
way that has become something of a different kind, this is a "qualitative change", whereas a 
change in something by which it still the same thing, though more or less, bigger or smaller, 
is a "quantitative change". In Hegel's Logic, quantity and quality belong to Being . . .For 
Engels' explanation of the dialectics of Quantity and Quality, especially in Nature, see the 
section from Anti-Duhring. 



Leon Trotsky 3 

cone bearings become inferior or completely worthless. 

Our scientific thinking is only a part of our general practice including tech- 
niques. For concepts there also exits 'tolerance' which is established not by 
formal logic issuing from the axiom 'A' is equal to 'A', but by the dialectical 
logic issuing from the axiom that everything is always changing. 'Common 
sense' is characterised by the fact that it systematically exceeds dialectical 
'tolerance'. 

Vulgar thought operates with such concepts as capitalism, morals, free- 
dom, workers' state, etc as fixed abstractions,, presuming that capitalism 
is equal to capitalism. Morals are equal to morals, etc. Dialectical think- 
ing analyses all things and phenomena in their continuous change, while 
determining in the material conditions of those changes that critical limit 
beyond which 'A' ceases to be 'A', a workers' state ceases to be a workers' 
state. 

The fundamental flaw of vulgar thought lies in the fact that it wishes to 
content itself with motionless imprints of a reality which consists of eternal 
motion. Dialectical thinking gives to concepts, by means of closer approx- 
imations, corrections, concretisation, a richness of content and flexibility; I 
would even say 'a succulence' which to a certain extent brings them closer 
to living phenomena. Not capitalism in general, but a given capitalism at 
a given stage of development. Not a workers' state in general, but a given 
workers' state in a backward country in an imperialist encirclement, etc. 

Dialectical thinking is related to vulgar in the same way that a motion pic- 
ture is related to a still photograph. The motion picture does not outlaw 
the still photograph but combines a series of them according to the laws 
of motion. Dialectics does not deny the syllogism, but teaches us to com- 
bine syllogisms in such a way as to bring our understanding closer to the 
eternally changing reality. Hegel in his Logic established a series of laws: 
change of quantity into quality, development through contradictions, con- 
flict of content and form, interruption of continuity, change of possibility 
into inevitability, etc., which are just as important for theoretical thought as 
is the simple syllogism for more elementary tasks. 

Hegel wrote before Darwin and before Marx. Thanks to the powerful im- 
pulse given to thought by the French Revolution, Hegel anticipated the 
general movement of science. But because it was only an anticipation, al- 
though by a genius, it received from Hegel an idealistic character. Hegel 
operated with ideological shadows as the ultimate reality. Marx demon- 
strated that the movement of these ideological shadows reflected nothing 
but the movement of material bodies. 

We call our dialectic materialist, since its roots are neither in heaven nor 
in the depths of our "free will", but in objective reality, in nature. Con- 



4 The ABC of Materialist Dialectics 

sciousness grew out of the unconscious, psychology out of physiology the 
organic world out of the inorganic, the solar system out of the nebulae. On 
all the rungs of this ladder of development, the quantitative changes were 
transformed into qualitative. Our thought, including dialectical thought, 
is only one of the forms of the expression of changing matter. There is 
place within this system for neither God nor Devil, nor immortal soul, nor 
eternal norms of laws and morals. The dialectic of thinking, having grown 
out of the dialectic of nature, possess consequently a thoroughly materialist 
character. 

Darwinism, which explained the evolution of species through quantitative 
transformations passing into qualitative, was the highest triumph of the di- 
alectic in the whole field of organic matter. Another great triumph was the 
discovery of the table of atomic weights of chemical elements and further 
the transformation of one element into another. 

With these transformations (species, elements, etc.) is closely linked the 
question of classification, equally important in the natural as in the social 
sciences. Linnaeus' system (18th century), utilising as its starting point the 
immutability of species, was limited to the description and classification 
of plants according to their external characteristics. The infantile period of 
botany is analogous to the infantile period of logic, since the forms of our 
thought develop like everything that lives. Only decisive repudiation of the 
idea of fixed species, only the study of the history of the evolution of plants 
and their anatomy prepared the basis for a really scientific classification. 

Marx, who in distinction from Darwin was a conscious dialectician, dis- 
covered a basis for the scientific classification of human societies in the de- 
velopment of their productive forces and the structure of the relations of 
ownership which constitute the anatomy of society. Marxism substituted 
for the vulgar descriptive classification of societies and states, which even 
up to now still flourishes in the universities, a materialistic dialectical clas- 
sification. Only through using the method of Marx is it possible correctly 
to determine both the concept of a workers' state and the moment of its 
downfall. 

All this, as we see, contains nothing 'metaphysical' or 'scholastic', as con- 
ceited ignorance affirms. Dialectic logic expresses the laws of motion in 
contemporary scientific thought. The struggle against materialist dialec- 
tics on the contrary expresses a distant past, conservatism of the petit- 
bourgeoisie, the self-conceit of university routinists and ... a spark of hope 
for an after-life. 



Leon Trotsky 5 

The Nature of the USSR 

The definition of the USSR given by comrade Burnham, 'not a workers' 
and not a bourgeois state', is purely negative, wrenched from the chain of 
historical development, left dangling in mid-air, void of a single particle of 
sociology and represents simply a theoretical capitulation of pragmatism 
before a contradictory historical phenomenon. 

If Burnham were a dialectical materialist, he would have probed the fol- 
lowing three questions: 

1. What was the historical origin of the USSR? 

2. What changes has this state suffered during its existence? 

3. Did these changes pass from the quantitative stage to the qualitative? 
That is, did they create a historically necessary domination by a new 
exploiting class? 

Answering these questions would have forced Burnham to draw the only 
possible conclusion the USSR is still a degenerated workers' state. 

The dialectic is not a magic master key for all questions. It does not replace 
concrete scientific analysis. But it directs this analysis along the correct 
road, securing it against sterile wanderings in the desert of subjectivism 
and scholasticism. 

Bruno R. Places both the Soviet and fascist regimes under the category of 
'bureaucratic collectivism', because the USSR, Italy and Germany are all 
ruled by bureaucracies; here and there are the principles of planning; in 
one case private property is liquidated, in another limited, etc. Thus on the 
basis of the relative similarity of certain external characteristics of different 
origin, of different specific weight, of different class significance, a fun- 
damental identity of social regimes is constructed, completely i the spirit 
of bourgeois professors who construct, categories of 'controlled economy', 
centralised state', without taking into consideration whatsoever the class 
nature of one or the other, Bruno R and his followers, or semi-followers like 
Burnham, at best remain in the sphere of social classification on the level 
of Linnaeus in whose justification it should be remarked however that he 
lived before Hegel, Darwin and Marx. 

Even worse and more dangerous, perhaps, are those eclectics who express 
the idea that the class character of the Soviet state 'does not matter', and 
that the direction of our policy is determined by the 'character of the war'. 
As if the war were an independent super-social substance; as if the charac- 
ter of the war were not determined by the character of the ruling class, that 



The ABC of Materialist Dialectics 



is, by the same social factor that also determines the character of the state. 
Astonishing how easily some comrades forget the ABCs of Marxism under 
the blows of events! 

It is not surprising that the theoreticians of the opposition who reject di- 
alectic thought capitulate lamentably before the contradictory nature of the 
USSR. However the contradiction between the social basis laid down by 
the revolution, and the character of the caste which arose out of the degen- 
eration of the revolution is not only an irrefutable historical fact but also a 
motor force. In our struggle for the overthrow of the bureaucracy we base 
ourselves on this contradiction. Meanwhile some ultra-lefts have already 
reached the ultimate absurdity by affirming that it is necessary to sacrifice 
the social structure of the USSR in order to overthrow the Bonapartist oli- 
garchy! They have no suspicion that the USSR minus the social structure 
founded by the October Revolution would be a fascist regime. 



Evolution and Dialectics 

Comrade Burnham will probably protest that as an evolutionist he is in- 
terested in the development of society and state forms not less than we 
dialecticians. We will not dispute this. Every educated person since Dar- 
win has labelled themself an 'evolutionist'. But a real evolutionist must 
apply the idea of evolution to his own forms of thinking. Elementary logic 
founded in the period when the idea of evolution itself did not yet exist, 
is evidently insufficient for the analysis of evolutionary processes. Hegel's 
logic is the logic of evolution. Only one must not forget that the concept of 
'evolution' itself has been completely corrupted and emasculated by uni- 
versity and liberal writers to mean peaceful 'progress'. Whoever has come 
to understand that evolution process through the struggle of antagonis- 
tic forces; that a slow accumulation of changes at a certain moment ex- 
plodes the old shell and brings about a catastrophe, revolution; whoever 
has learned finally to apply the general laws of evolution to thinking itself, 
he is a dialectician, as distinguished from vulgar evolutionists. Dialectic 
training of the mind, as necessary to a revolutionary fighter as finger exer- 
cises to a pianist, demands approaching all problems as processes and not 
as motionless categories. Whereas vulgar evolutionists, who limit them- 
selves generally to recognising evolution in only certain spheres, content 
themselves in all other questions with the banalities of 'common sense'. 

From A Petit-bourgeois Opposition in the Socialist Workers Party by Leon Trotsky 



