Anarchism - A Service to Humanity Collection 




© February 2014 - Skull Press Ebook Publication - Ghent, Belgium 

Non- Commercial 



From: The Place of the Individual in Society, Chicago: 1940. 



THE INDIVIDUAL, SOCIETY AND THE STATE 

EMMA GOLDMAN 

The minds of men are in confusion, for the very foundations of our civilization 
seem to be tottering. People are losing faith in the existing institutions, and the 
more intelligent realize that capitalist industrialism is defeating the very purpose 
it is supposed to serve. 

The world is at a loss for a way out. Parliamentarism and democracy are on the 
decline. Salvation is being sought in Fascism and other forms of "strong" 
government. 

The struggle of opposing ideas now going on in the world involves social 
problems urgently demanding a solution. The welfare of the individual and the 
fate of human society depend on the right answer to those questions The crisis, 
unemployment, war, disarmament, international relations, etc., are among those 
problems. 

The State, government with its functions and powers, is now the subject of vital 
interest to every thinking man. Political developments in all civilized countries 
have brought the questions home. Shall we have a strong government? Are 
democracy and parliamentary government to be preferred, or is Fascism of one 
kind or another, dictatorship — monarchical, bourgeois or proletarian — the 
solution of the ills and difficulties that beset society today? 

In other words, shall we cure the evils of democracy by more democracy, or 
shall we cut the Gordian knot of popular government with the sword of 
dictatorship? 

My answer is neither the one nor the other. I am against dictatorship and 
Fascism as I am opposed to parliamentary regimes and so-called political 
democracy. 

Nazism has been justly called an attack on civilization. This characterization 
applies with equal force to every form of dictatorship; indeed, to every kind of 
suppression and coercive authority. For what is civilization in the true sense? All 
progress has been essentially an enlargement of the liberties of the individual 
with a corresponding decrease of the authority wielded over him by external 
forces. This holds good in the realm of physical as well as of political and 
economic existence. In the physical world man has progressed to the extent in 
which he has subdued the forces of nature and made them useful to himself. 



2 



Primitive man made a step on the road to progress when he first produced fire 
and thus triumphed over darkness, when he chained the wind or harnessed 
water. 

What role did authority or government play in human endeavor for betterment, 
in invention and discovery? None whatever, or at least none that was helpful. It 
has always been the individual that has accomplished every miracle in that 
sphere, usually in spite of the prohibition, persecution and interference by 
authority, human and divine. 

Similarly, in the political sphere, the road of progress lay in getting away more 
and more from the authority of the tribal chief or of the clan, of prince and king, 
of government, of the State. Economically, progress has meant greater well- 
being of ever larger numbers. Culturally, it has signified the result of all the 
other achievements — greater independence, political, mental and psychic. 

Regarded from this angle, the problems of man's relation to the State assumes an 
entirely different significance. It is no more a question of whether dictatorship is 
preferable to democracy, or Italian Fascism superior to Hitlerism. A larger and 
far more vital question poses itself: Is political government, is the State 
beneficial to mankind, and how does it affect the individual in the social scheme 
of things? 

The individual is the true reality in life. A cosmos in himself, he does not exist 
for the State, nor for that abstraction called "society," or the "nation," which is 
only a collection of individuals. Man, the individual, has always been and, 
necessarily is the sole source and motive power of evolution and progress. 
Civilization has been a continuous struggle of the individual or of groups of 
individuals against the State and even against "society," that is, against the 
majority subdued and hypnotized by the State and State worship. Man's greatest 
battles have been waged against man-made obstacles and artificial handicaps 
imposed upon him to paralyze his growth and development. Human thought has 
always been falsified by tradition and custom, and perverted false education in 
the interests of those who held power and enjoyed privileges. In other words, by 
the State and the ruling classes. This constant incessant conflict has been the 
history of mankind. 

Individuality may be described as the consciousness of the individual as to what 
he is and how he lives. It is inherent in every human being and is a thing of 
growth. The State and social institutions come and go, but individuality remains 
and persists. The very essence of individuality is expression; the sense of dignity 
and independence is the soil wherein it thrives. Individuality is not the 
impersonal and mechanistic thing that the State treats as an "individual". The 
individual is not merely the result of heredity and environment, of cause and 

3 



effect. He is that and a great deal more, a great deal else. The living man cannot 
be defined; he is the fountain-head of all life and all values; he is not a part of 
this or of that; he is a whole, an individual whole, a growing, changing, yet 
always constant whole. 

Individuality is not to be confused with the various ideas and concepts of 
Individualism; much less with that "rugged individualism" which is only a 
masked attempt to repress and defeat the individual and his individuality So- 
called Individualism is the social and economic laissez faire: the exploitation of 
the masses by the classes by means of legal trickery, spiritual debasement and 
systematic indoctrination of the servile spirit, which process is known as 
"education." That corrupt and perverse "individualism" is the strait-jacket of 
individuality. It has converted life into a degrading race for externals, for 
possession, for social prestige and supremacy. Its highest wisdom is "the devil 
take the hindmost." 

This "rugged individualism" has inevitably resulted in the greatest modern 
slavery, the crassest class distinctions, driving millions to the breadline. 
"Rugged individualism" has meant all the "individualism" for the masters, while 
the people are regimented into a slave caste to serve a handful of self-seeking 
"supermen." America is perhaps the best representative of this kind of 
individualism, in whose name political tyranny and social oppression are 
defended and held up as virtues; while every aspiration and attempt of man to 
gain freedom and social opportunity to live is denounced as "un Americain" and 
evil in the name of that same individualism. 

There was a time when the State was unknown. In his natural condition man 
existed without any State or organized government. People lived as families in 
small communities; They tilled the soil and practiced the arts and crafts. The 
individual, and later the family, was the unit of social life where each was free 
and the equal of his neighbor. Human society then was not a State but an 
association; a voluntary association for mutual protection and benefit. The 
elders and more experienced members were the guides and advisers of the 
people. They helped to manage the affairs of life, not to rule and dominate the 
individual. 

Political government and the State were a much later development, growing out 
of the desire of the stronger to take advantage of the weaker, of the few against 
the many. The State, ecclesiastical and secular, served to give an appearance of 
legality and right to the wrong done by the few to the many. That appearance of 
right was necessary the easier to rule the people, because no government can 
exist without the consent of the people, consent open, tacit or assumed. 
Constitutionalism and democracy are the modern forms of that alleged consent; 



4 



the concent being inoculated and indoctrinated by what is called "education," at 
home, in the church, and in every other phase of life. 

That consent is the belief in authority, in the necessity for it. At its base is the 
doctrine that man is evil, vicious, and too incompetent to know what is good for 
him. On this all government and oppression is built. God and the State exist and 
are supported by this dogma. 

Yet the State is nothing but a name. It is an abstraction. Like other similar 
conceptions— nation, race, humanity— it has no organic reality. To call the State 
an organism shows a diseased tendency to make a fetish of words. 

The State is a term for the legislative and administrative machinery whereby 
certain business of the people is transacted, and badly so. There is nothing 
sacred, holy or mysterious about it. The State has no more conscience or moral 
mission than a commercial company for working a coal mine or running a 
railroad. 

The State has no more existence than gods and devils have. They are equally the 
reflex and creation of man, for man, the individual, is the only reality. The State 
is but the shadow of man, the shadow of his opaqueness of his ignorance and 
fear. 

Life begins and ends with man, the individual. Without him there is no race, no 
humanity, no State. No, not even "society" is possible without man. It is the 
individual who lives, breathes and suffers. His development, his advance, has 
been a continuous struggle against the fetishes of his own creation and 
particularly so against the "State." 

In former days religious authority fashioned political life in the image of the 
Church. The authority of the State, the "rights" of rulers came from on high; 
power, like faith, was divine. Philosophers have written thick volumes to prove 
the sanctity of the State; some have even clad it with infallibility and with god- 
like attributes Some have talked themselves into the insane notion that the State 
is "superhuman," the supreme reality, "the absolute." 

Enquiry was condemned as blasphemy. Servitude was the highest virtue. By 
such precepts and training certain things came to be regarded as self-evident, as 
sacred of their truth ,but [sic] because of constant and persistent repetition. 

All progress has been essentially an unmasking of "divinity" and "mystery," of 
alleged sacred, eternal "truth"; it has been a gradual elimination of the abstract 
and the substitution in its place of the real, the concrete. In short, of facts against 
fancy, of knowledge against ignorance, of light against darkness. 



5 



That slow and arduous liberation of the individual was not accomplished by the 
aid of the State. On the contrary, it was by continuous conflict, by a life-and 
death struggle with the State, that even the smallest vestige of independence and 
freedom has been won. It has cost mankind much time and blood to secure what 
little it has gained so far from kings, tsars and governments 

The great heroic figure of that long Golgotha has been Man. It has always been 
the individual, often alone and singly, at other times in unity and co-operation 
with others of his kind, who has fought and bled in the age-long battle against 
suppression and oppression, against the powers that enslave and degrade him. 

More than that and more significant: It was man, the individual, whose soul first 
rebelled against injustice and degradation; it was the individual who first 
conceived the idea of resistance to the conditions under which he chafed. In 
short, it is always the individual who is the parent of the liberating thought as 
well as of the deed. 

This refers not only to political struggles, but to the entire gamut of human life 
and effort, in all ages and climes. It has always been the individual, the man of 
strong mind and will to liberty, who paved the way for every human advance, 
for every step toward a freer and better world; in science, philosophy and art, as 
well as in industry, whose genius rose to the heights, conceiving the 
"impossible," visualizing its realization and imbuing others with his enthusiasm 
to work and strive for it. Socially speaking, it was always the prophet, the seer, 
the idealist, who dreamed of a world more to his heart's desire and who served 
as the beacon light on the road to greater achievement. 

The State, every government whatever its form, character or color—be it 
absolute or constitutional, monarchy or republic, Fascist, Nazi or Bolshevik— is 
by its very nature conservative, static, intolerant of change and opposed to it. 
Whatever changes it undergoes are always the result of pressure exerted upon it, 
pressure strong enough to compel the ruling powers to submit peaceably or 
otherwise, generally "otherwise"— that is, by revolution. Moreover, the inherent 
conservatism of government, of authority of any kind, unavoidably becomes 
reactionary. For two reasons: first, because it is in the nature of government not 
only to retain the power it has, but also to strengthen, widen and perpetuate it, 
nationally as well as internationally. The stronger authority grows, the greater 
the State and its power, the less it can tolerate a similar authority or political 
power along side of itself. The psychology of government demands that its 
influence and prestige constantly grow, at home and abroad, and it exploits 
every opportunity to increase it. This tendency is motivated by the financial and 
commercial interests back of the government, represented and served by it. The 
fundamental "raison d'etre" of every government to which, incidentally, 



6 



historians of former days willfully shut their eyes, has become too obvious now 
even for professors to ignore. 

The other factor which impels governments to become even more conservative 
and reactionary is their inherent distrust of the individual and fear of 
individuality. Our political and social scheme cannot afford to tolerate the 
individual and his constant quest for innovation. In "self-defense" the State 
therefore suppresses, persecutes, punishes and even deprives the individual of 
life. It is aided in this by every institution that stands for the preservation of the 
existing order. It resorts to every form of violence and force, and its efforts are 
supported by the "moral indignation" of the majority against the heretic, the 
social dissenter and the political rebel— the majority for centuries drilled in State 
worship, trained in discipline and obedience and subdued by the awe of 
authority in the home, the school, the church and the press. 

The strongest bulwark of authority is uniformity; the least divergence from it is 
the greatest crime. The wholesale mechanization of modern life has increased 
uniformity a thousand-fold. It is everywhere present, in habits, tastes, dress, 
thoughts and ideas. Its most concentrated dullness is "public opinion." Few have 
the courage to stand out against it. He who refuses to submit is at once labelled 
"queer," "different," and decried as a disturbing element in the comfortable 
stagnancy of modern life. 

Perhaps even more than constituted authority, it is social uniformity and 
sameness that harass the individual most. His very "uniqueness," "separateness" 
and "differentiation" make him an alien, not only in his native place, but even in 
his own home. Often more so than the foreign born who generally falls in with 
the established. 

In the true sense one's native land, with its back ground of tradition, early 
impressions, reminiscences and other things dear to one, is not enough to make 
sensitive human beings feel at home. A certain atmosphere of "belonging," the 
consciousness of being "at one" with the people and environment, is more 
essential to one's feeling of home. This holds good in relation to one's family, 
the smaller local circle, as well as the larger phase of the life and activities 
commonly called one's country. The individual whose vision encompasses the 
whole world often feels nowhere so hedged in and out of touch with his 
surroundings than in his native land. 

In pre-war time the individual could at least escape national and family 
boredom. The whole world was open to his longings and his quests. Now the 
world has become a prison, and life continual solitary confinement. Especially is 
this true since the advent of dictatorship, right and left. 



7 



Friedrich Nietzsche called the State a cold monster. What would he have called 
the hideous beast in the garb of modern dictatorship? Not that government had 
ever allowed much scope to the individual; but the champions of the new State 
ideology do not grant even that much. "The individual is nothing," they declare, 
"it is the collectivity which counts." Nothing less than the complete surrender of 
the individual will satisfy the insatiable appetite of the new deity. 

Strangely enough, the loudest advocates of thig new gospel are to be found 
among the British and American intelligentsia. Just now they are enamored with 
the "dictatorship of the proletariat." In theory only, to be sure. In practice, they 
still prefer the few liberties in their own respective countries. They go to Russia 
for a short visit or as salesmen of the "revolution," but they feel safer and more 
comfortable at home. 

Perhaps it is not only lack of courage which keeps these good British and 
Americans in their native lands rather than in the millenium come. 
Subconsciously there may lurk the feeling that individuality remains the most 
fundamental fact of all human association, suppressed and persecuted yet never 
defeated, and in the long run the victor. 

The "genius of man," which is but another name for personality and 
individuality, bores its way through all the caverns of dogma, through the thick 
walls of tradition and custom, defying all taboos, setting authority at naught, 
facing contumely and the scaffold — ultimately to be blessed as prophet and 
martyr by succeeding generations. But for the "genuis of man," that inherent, 
persistent quality of individuality, we would be still roaming the primeval 
forests. 

Peter Kropotkin has shown what wonderful results this unique force of man's 
individuality has achieved when strengthened by co-operation with other 
individualities. The one-sided and entirely inadequate Darwinian theory of the 
struggle for existence received its biological and sociological completion from 
the great Anarchist scientist and thinker. In his profound work, Mutual Aid 
Kropotkin shows that in the animal kingdom, as well as in human society, co- 
operation—as opposed to internecine strife and struggle— has worked for the 
survival and evolution of the species. He demonstrated that only mutual aid and 
voluntary co-operation— not the omnipotent, all-devastating State— can create 
the basis for a free individual and associational life. 

At present the individual is the pawn of the zealots of dictatorship and the 
equally obsessed zealots of "rugged individualism." The excuse of the former is 
its claim of a new objective. The latter does not even make a pretense of 
anything new. As a matter of fact "rugged individualism" has learned nothing 
and forgotten nothing. Under its guidance the brute struggle for physical 

8 



existence is still kept up. Strange as it may seem, and utterly absurd as it is, the 
struggle for physical survival goes merrily on though the necessity for it has 
entirely disappeared. Indeed, the struggle is being continued apparently because 
there is no necessity for it. Does not so-called overproduction prove it? Is not the 
world-wide economic crisis an eloquent demonstration that the struggle for 
existence is being maintained by the blindness of "rugged individualism" at the 
risk of its own destruction? 

One of the insane characteristics of this struggle is the complete negation of the 
relation of the producer to the things he produces. The average worker has no 
inner point of contact with the industry he is employed in, and he is a stranger to 
the process of production of which he is a mechanical part. Like any other cog 
of the machine, he is replaceable at any time by other similar depersonalized 
human beings. 

The intellectual proletarian, though he foolishly thinks himself a free agent, is 
not much better off. He, too, has a little choice or self-direction, in his particular 
metier as his brother who works with his hands. Material considerations and 
desire for greater social prestige are usually the deciding factors in the vocation 
of the intellectual. Added to it is the tendency to follow in the footsteps of 
family tradition, and become doctors, lawyers, teachers, engineers, etc. The 
groove requires less effort and personality. In consequence nearly everybody is 
out of place in our present scheme of things. The masses plod on, partly because 
their senses have been dulled by the deadly routine of work and because they 
must eke out an existence. This applies with even greater force to the political 
fabric of today. There is no place in its texture for free choice of independent 
thought and activity. There is a place only for voting and tax -paying puppets. 

The interests of the State and those of the individual differ fundamentally and 
are antagonistic. The State and the political and economic institutions it supports 
can exist only by fashioning the individual to their particular purpose; training 
him to respect "law and order;" teaching him obedience, submission and 
unquestioning faith in the wisdom and justice of government; above all, loyal 
service and complete self-sacrifice when the State commands it, as in war. The 
State puts itself and its interests even above the claims of religion and of God. It 
punishes religious or conscientious scruples against individuality because there 
is no individuality without liberty, and liberty is the greatest menace to 
authority. 

The struggle of the individual against these tremendous odds is the more 
difficult—too often dangerous to life and limb— because it is not truth or 
falsehood which serves as the criterion of the opposition he meets. It is not the 
validity or usefulness of his thought or activity which rouses against him the 
forces of the State and of "public opinion." The persecution of the innovator and 

9 



protestant has always been inspired by fear on the part of constituted authority 
of having its infallibility questioned and its power undermined. 

Man's true liberation, individual and collective, lies in his emancipation from 
authority and from the belief in it. All human evolution has been a struggle in 
that direction and for that object. It is not invention and mechanics which 
constitute development. The ability to travel at the rate of 100 miles an hour is 
no evidence of being civilized. True civilization is to be measured by the 
individual, the unit of all social life; by his individuality and the extent to which 
it is free to have its being to grow and expand unhindered by invasive and 
coercive authority. 

Socially speaking, the criterion of civilization and culture is the degree of liberty 
and economic opportunity which the individual enjoys; of social and 
international unity and co-operation unrestricted by man-made laws and other 
artificial obstacles; by the absence of privileged castes and by the reality of 
liberty and human dignity; in short, by the true emancipation of the individual. 

Political absolutism has been abolished because men have realized in the course 
of time that absolute power is evil and destructive. But the same thing is true of 
all power, whether it be the power of privilege, of money, of the priest, of the 
politician or of so-called democracy. In its effect on individuality it matters little 
what the particular character of coercion is —whether it be as black as Fascism, 
as yellow as Nazism or as pretentiously red as Bolshevism. It is power that 
corrupts and degrades both master and slave and it makes no difference whether 
the power is wielded by an autocrat, by parliament or Soviets. More pernicious 
than the power of a dictator is that of a class; the most terrible—the tyranny of a 
majority. 

The long process of history has taught man that division and strife mean death, 
and that unity and cooperation advance his cause, multiply his strength and 
further his welfare. The spirit of government has always worked against the 
social application of this vital lesson, except where it served the State and aided 
its own particular interests. It is this anti-progressive and anti-social spirit of the 
State and of the privileged castes back of it which has been responsible for the 
bitter struggle between man and man. The individual and ever larger groups of 
individuals are beginning to see beneath the surface of the established order of 
things. No longer are they so blinded as in the past by the glare and tinsel of the 
State idea, and of the "blessings" of "rugged individualism." Man is reaching out 
for the wider scope of human relations which liberty alone can give. For true 
liberty is not a mere scrap of paper called "constitution," "legal right" or "law." It 
is not an abstraction derived from the non-reality known as "the State." It is not 
the negative thing of being free from something, because with such freedom 
you may starve to death. Real freedom, true liberty is positive: it is freedom to 

10 



something; it is the liberty to be, to do; in short, the liberty of actual and active 
opportunity. 

That sort of liberty is not a gift: it is the natural right of man, of every human 
being. It cannot be given: it cannot be conferred by any law or government. The 
need of it, the longing for it, is inherent in the individual. Disobedience to every 
form of coercion is the instinctive expression of it. Rebellion and revolution are 
the more or less conscious attempt to achieve it. Those manifestations, 
individual and social, are fundamentally expressions of the values of man. That 
those values may be nurtured, the community must realize that its greatest and 
most lasting asset is the unit — the individual. 

In religion, as in politics, people speak of abstractions and believe they are 
dealing with realities. But when it does come to the real and the concrete, most 
people seem to lose vital touch with it. It may well be because reality alone is 
too matter-of-fact, too cold to enthuse the human soul. It can be aroused to 
enthusiasm only by things out of the commonplace, out of the ordinary. In other 
words, the Ideal is the spark that fires the imagination and hearts of men. Some 
ideal is needed to rouse man out of the inertia and humdrum of his existence and 
turn the abject slave into an heroic figure. 

Right here, of course, comes the Marxist objector who has outmarxed Marx 
himself. To such a one, man is a mere puppet in the hands of that metaphysical 
Almighty called economic determinism or, more vulgarly, the class struggle. 
Man's will, individual and collective, his psychic life and mental orientation 
count for almost nothing with our Marxist and do not affect his conception of 
human history. 

No intelligent student will deny the importance of the economic factor in the 
social growth and development of mankind. But only narrow and wilful 
dogmatism can persist in remaining blind to the important role played by an idea 
as conceived by the imagination and aspirations of the individual. 

It were vain and unprofitable to attempt to balance one factor as against another 
in human experience. No one single factor in the complex of individual or social 
behavior can be designated as the factor of decisive quality. We know too little, 
and may never know enough, of human psychology to weigh and measure the 
relative values of this or that factor in determining man's conduct. To form such 
dogmas in their social connotation is nothing short of bigotry; yet, perhaps, it 
has its uses, for the very attempt to do so proved the persistence of the human 
will and confutes the Marxists. 

Fortunately even some Marxists are beginning to see that all is not well with the 
Marxian creed. After all, Marx was but human — all too human — hence by no 



11 



means infallible. The practical application of economic determinism in Russia is 
helping to clear the minds of the more intelligent Marxists. This can be seen in 
the transvaluation of Marxian values going on in Socialist and even Communist 
ranks in some European countries. They are slowly realizing that their theory 
has overlooked the human element, den Menschen, as a Socialist paper put it. 
Important as the economic factor is, it is not enough. The rejuvenation of 
mankind needs the inspiration and energizing force of an ideal. 

Such an ideal I see in Anarchism. To be sure, not in the popular 
misrepresentations of Anarchism spread by the worshippers of the State and 
authority. I mean the philosophy of a new social order based on the released 
energies of the individual and the free association of liberated individuals. 

Of all social theories Anarchism alone steadfastly proclaims that society exists 
for man, not man for society. The sole legitimate purpose of society is to serve 
the needs and advance the aspiration of the individual. Only by doing so can it 
justify its existence and be an aid to progress and culture. 

The political parties and men savagely scrambling for power will scorn me as 
hopelessly out of tune with our time. I cheerfully admit the charge. I find 
comfort in the assurance that their hysteria lacks enduring quality. Their hosanna 
is but of the hour. 

Man's yearning for liberation from all authority and power will never be soothed 
by their cracked song. Man's quest for freedom from every shackle is eternal. It 
must and will go on. 

This pamphlet is sponsored by the Free Society Forum 
1241 N. California Avenue 
Chicago, Illinois 
[1940] 



12 



■ "NATIONALISM AND ITS RELATION 
TO CULTURE H 



! 



ih RUDOLF ROCXFJt 



J *«»yi.<J #4 1* lb* Mllinrjtilg <*g» T el S-«i»l I 

| *d«^*t« to MpUIfl ha- V^J lift il"*c1*if : 

J f^»iy i^'-l^i (OugM tfr loAmwUl* * I 

■ flWHph *f K*«(«y" wVri.h F(.v'J 4Nib^ vl tt J 

J rcKptJ lYBTrti. Ajkcibfl, Ho^»l, Mferc jthJ 'SpM^e* if* - 

; jwj* d ft"- 1 «n+mj rtw f**t ttwilart s+o tofv- * 

J '»i : ;Hji«i fo lh g/Mt but RocW w4Hr Kt pro- ; 

♦ vt-y ih» "Hn^tia* 0UI«<14»", "M*nn fcw^t ; 

1 LWIriy" r*** MM ; 

J Irt lkr| wrilati* ^ ~i4"p^ -S*p* <£<* -t-f t^^itflj^^, *4 IW+ * 

: tftf e** ut. <n i Crlng peaetu^i, Ik* <y*+h «^r%HVI fff I 

2 t'uj, Bik-,r<»»iM . Grttii Rutmm b«o**» £ 
2 tbte 'a *a •miih !k* i|*ri clarify jrai w^ttn'trndi^ 41 J 
J Km t^cu-jhti- arJ lAnti mt w umtfnpMuiH. I4» ' 

■ iq'pl^Hir prriM »g4rdl«i of hii ichoel fat Ifcgughl, Z 
I tm itturd toi «i«Jh r# wfrg frt»t "mfL ! 

! ■ Tf*Ho*ilin 4itd r, ^U-i^ Cdw»- ^ b* pub- 

! Wwd 41 t-« rail 11 N . *J hU at (7.(0 '« balk 

J v4luM*l, Wh vff«r T«U Ife «Ht wort Ml ■ pf)C* 4>< 

I i5v», It |« SUB5CWS IH *JBV/WCt. 

! 



; SURSCWK TODAY. 

■< X-Xk+HHVIW* ****** t.VOOW 

ilirHkM HM ttim m Aw, i+H k AI..-.1. Si * 

I Km Th^ H** Ti*H C^rliW Imf*^^ i 

! «»■ "»■* «•« Ptl M »+* <■* 



© February 2014 - Skull Press Ebook Publication - Ghent, Belgium 

Non- Commercial 



13 



