The Function of the University in a Time of Crisis* 



Noam Chomsky 
1969 



Writing 150 years ago, the great liberal reformer and humanist Wilhelm von 
Humboldt defined the university as "nothing other than the spiritual life of those 
human beings who are moved by external leisure or internal pressures toward 
learning and research." At every stage of his life, a free man will be driven, to 
a greater or lesser extent, by these "internal pressures." The society in which 
he lives may or may not provide him with the "external leisure" and the insti- 
tutional forms in which to realize this human need to discover and create, to 
explore and evaluate and come to understand, to refine and exercise his talents, 
to contemplate, to make his own individual contribution to contemporary cul- 
ture, to analyze and criticize and transform this culture and the social structure 
in which it is rooted. Even if the university did not exist formally, Humboldt 
observes, "one person would privately reflect and collect, another join with men 
of his own age, a third find a circle of disciples. Such is the picture to which 
the state must remain faithful if it wishes to give an institutional form to such 
indefinite and rather accidental human operations. 1 

[One measure of the level of civilization] 

The extent to which existing institutional forms permit these human needs to 
be satisfied provides one measure of the level of civilization that a society has 
achieved. One element in the unending struggle to achieve a more just and 
humane social order will be the effort to remove the barriers — whether they be 
economic, ideological, or political — that stand in the way of the particular forms 
of individual self- fulfillment and collective action that the university should make 
possible. 

It is the great merit of the student movement of the 1960s to have helped 
shatter the complacency that had settled over much of American intellectual 
life, both with regard to American society and to the role of the universities 
within it. The renewed concern with university reform is in large measure a 
consequence of student activism. A great deal of energy has been directed 
to problems of "restructuring the university" : democratizing it, redistributing 



*This essay is excerpted from Chomsky on Democracy and Education, ed. C. P. Otero 
(New York: RoutledgeFalmer, 2003), pp. 178-94. Transcribed and typeset in IATgX by 
ol2144Scolumbia.edu (Ori Livneh). 



"power" in it, reducing constraints on student freedom as well as the dependence 
of the university on outside institutions. I suspect that little can be achieved of 
real substance along these lines. Formal changes in the university structure will 
have little effect on what a student does with his life, or on the relation of the 
university to the society. To the extent that reform does not reach the heart of 
the university — the content of the curriculum, the interaction between student 
and teacher, the nature of research, and, in some fields, the practice that relates 
to theory — it will remain superficial. But it is doubtful that these matters will 
be significantly affected by the kinds of structural reforms that are now being 
actively debated on many campuses. 

It is pointless to discuss the "function of the university" in abstraction from 
concrete historical circumstances, as it would be a waste of effort to study any 
other social institution in this way. In a different society entirely different ques- 
tions might arise as to the function of the university and the problems that are 
pressing. To one who believes, as I do, that our society must undergo drastic 
changes if civilization is to advance, — perhaps even to survive — university re- 
form will appear an insignificant matter except insofar as it contributes to social 
change. Apart from this question, improvements in the university can no doubt 
take place within the framework of the presently existing institutional forms, 
and drastic revision of these forms will contribute little to it. 

It is never an easy matter to determine to what extent deficiencies of a partic- 
ular institution can actually be overcome through internal reform and to what 
extent they reflect characteristics of society at large or matters of individual 
psychology that are relatively independent of social forms. 

[Sharing of discovery and mutual assistance] 

Consider, for example, the competitiveness fostered in the university, in fact, in 
the school system as a whole. It is difficult to convince oneself that this serves an 
educational purpose. Certainly it does not prepare the student for the life of a 
scholar or scientist. It would be absurd to demand of the working scientist that 
he keep his work secret so that his colleagues will not know of his achievements 
and not be helped by his discoveries in pursuing their own studies and research. 
Yet this demand is often made of the student in the classroom. In later life, 
collective effort with sharing of discovery and mutual assistance is the idea; if it is 
not the norm, we rightly interpret this as an inadequacy of those who cannot rise 
above personal aggrandizement and to this extent are incompetent as scholars 
and teachers. Yet even at the most advanced level of graduate education, the 
student is discouraged by university regulation from working as any reasonable 
man would certainly choose to do: individually, where his interests lead him; 
collectively, where he can learn from and give aid to his fellows. Course projects 
and examinations are individual and competitive. The doctoral dissertation not 
only is required to be a purely individual contribution; beyond this questionable 
requirement, there is a built-in bias toward insignificance in the requirement 
that a finished piece of work be completed in a fixed time span. The student 



is obliged to set himself a limited goal and to avoid adventuresome, speculative 
investigation that may challenge the conventional framework of scholarship and 
correspondingly, runs a high risk of failure. In this respect, the institutional 
forms of the university encourage mediocrity. 

Perhaps this limitation is one reason why it is so common for a scholar to 
devote his career to trivial modifications of what he has already done. The pat- 
terns of thinking imposed in his early work, the poverty of conception that is 
fostered by too-rigid institutional forms, may limit his imagination and distort 
his vision. That many escape these limitations is a tribute to the human ability 
to resist pressures that tend to restrict the variety and creativity of life and 
thought. What is true even at the most advanced levels of graduate education 
is far more significant at earlier stages, as many critics have eloquently demon- 
strated. Still, it is not evident, even in this case, to what extent the fault is one 
of the universities and to what extent it is inherent to the role assigned them 
in a competitive society, where pursuit of self-interest is elevated to the highest 
goal. 

Some of the pressures that impoverish the educational experience and distort 
the natural relation of student and teacher clearly have their origin in demands 
that are imposed on the school. Consider, for example, the sociological problem 
defined by Daniel Bell: "Higher education has been burdened with the task of 
becoming a gatekeeper — perhaps the only gatekeeper — to significant place and 
privilege in society;. . . it means that the education system is no longer geared to 
teaching but to judging. 2 Jencks and Riesman make a similar point: "College is a 
kind of protracted aptitude test for measuring certain aspects of intelligence and 
character." The result: "Reliance on colleges to preselect the upper-middle class 
obviously eliminates most youngsters born into lower-strata families, since they 
have 'the wrong attitudes' for academic success. 3 The effect is that the university 
serves as an instrument for ensuring the perpetuation of social privilege. 

[Open to any person, at any stage of life] 

The same, incidentally, holds for later life. To achieve the Humboldtian ideal, 
a university should be open to any man, at any stage of life, who wishes to 
avail himself to this institutional form for enhancing his "spiritual life." In fact, 
there are programs for bringing corporate executives or engineers from industry 
to the university for specialized training or simply for broadening their cultural 
background, but none, to my knowledge, for shoemakers or industrial workers, 
who could, in principle, profit no less from these opportunities. Evidently, 
it would be misleading to describe these inequities merely as defects of the 
university. 

In general, there is little if any educational function to the requirement that 
the university be concerned with certification as well as with education and 
research. On the contrary, this requirement interferes with its proper function. 
It is a demand imposed by a society that ensures, in many ways, the preservation 
of certain forms of privilege and elitism. 



Or consider the often-voiced demand that the universities serve the needs 
of the outside society — that its activities be "relevant" to general social con- 
cerns. Put in a very general way, this demand is justifiable. Translated, into 
practice, however, it generally means that the universities provide a service to 
those existing social institutions that are in a position to articulate their needs 
and to subsidize the effort to meet these needs. It is not difficult for members 
of the university community to delude themselves into believing that they are 
maintaining a "neutral, value-free" position when they simply respond to de- 
mands set elsewhere. In fact, to do so is to make a political decision, namely, to 
ratify the existing distribution of power, authority, and privilege in the society 
at large, and to take on a commitment to reinforce it. The Pentagon and the 
great corporations can formulate their needs and subsidize the kind of work 
that will answer to them. The peasants of Guatemala or the unemployed in 
Harlem are in no position to do so, obviously. A free society should encourage 
the development of a university that escapes the not-too-subtle compulsion to 
be "relevant" in this sense. The university will be able to make its contribution 
to a free society only to the extent that it overcomes the temptation to conform 
unthinkingly to the prevailing ideology and to the existing patterns of power 
and privilege. 

[A center of intellectual stimulation: ("subver- 
sive") challenges of orthodoxy] 

In its relation to society, a free university should be expected to be, in a sense, 
"subversive." We take for granted that creative work in any field will challenge 
prevailing orthodoxy. A physicist who refines yesterday's experiment, an engi- 
neer who merely seeks to improve existing devices, or an artist who limits himself 
to styles and techniques that have been thoroughly explored is rightly regarded 
as deficient in creative imagination. Exciting work in science, technology, schol- 
arship, or the arts will probe the frontiers of understanding and try to create 
alternatives to the conventional assumptions. If, in some field of inquiry this is 
no longer true, then the field will be abandoned by those who seek intellectual 
adventure. These observations are cliches that few will question — except in the 
study of man and society. The social critic who seeks to formulate a vision of a 
more just and human social order, and is concerned with the discrepancy — more 
often, the chasm — that separates this vision from the reality that confronts him, 
is a frightening creature who must "overcome his alienation" and become "re- 
sponsible," "realistic," and "pragmatic." To decode these expressions: he must 
stop questioning our values and threatening our privilege. He may be concerned 
with technical modifications of existing society that improve its efficiency and 
blur its inequities, but he must not try to design a radically different alterna- 
tive and involve himself in an attempt to bring about social change. He must, 
therefore, abandon the path of creative inquiry as it is conceived in other do- 
mains. It is hardly necessary to stress that this prejudice is even more rigidly 



institutionalized in the state socialist societies. 

Obviously, a free mind may fall into error; the social critic is no less immune 
to this possibility that the inventive scientist or artist. It may be that at a 
given stage of technology, the most important activity is to improve the inter- 
nal combustion engine, and that at a given stage of social evolution, primary 
attention should be given to the study of fiscal measures that will improve the 
operation of the system of state capitalism of the Western democracies. This is 
possible, but hardly obvious, in either case. The universities offer freedom and 
encouragement to those who question the first of these assumptions, but more 
rarely to those who question the second. The reasons are fairly clear. Since the 
dominant voice in any society is that of the beneficiaries of the status quo, the 
•'alienated intellectual" who tries to pursue the normal path of honest inquiry — 
perhaps falling into error on the way — and thus often finds himself challenging 
the conventional wisdom, tends to be a lonely figure. The degree of protection 
and support afforded him by the university is, again, a measure of its success 
in fulfilling its proper function in society. It is, furthermore, a measure of the 
willingness of the society to submit its ideology and structure to critical analysis 
and evaluation, and of its willingness to overcome inequities and defects that 
will be revealed by such a critique. 

Such problems as these, which will never cease to exist, so long as human 
society continues — have become somewhat more critical in the last few years 
for a number of reasons. In an advanced industrial society, the linkage between 
the university and external social institutions tend to become more tight and 
intricate because of the utility of the "knowledge that is produced" (to use a 
vulgar idiom) and the training that is provided. 

This is a familiar insight. Half a century ago, Randolph Bourne noted that 
the world war had brought to leadership a liberal, technical intelligentsia "im- 
mensely ready for the executive ordering of events, pitifully unprepared for the 
intellectual interpretation or the idealistic focussing of ends," pragmatic intellec- 
tuals who "have absorbed the secret of scientific method as applied to political 
administration" and who readily "lined up in the service of the war technique." 
Turning to the university, and taking Columbia University as the prototype, he 
described it as "a financial corporation, strictly analogous, in its motives and 
responses, to the corporation which is concerned in the production of industrial 
commodities.. . .The university produces learning instead of steel or rubber, but 
the nature of the academic commodity has become less and less potent in in- 
suring for the academic workman a status materially different from that of any 
other kind of employee." The trustees, he claimed, define their obligation in 
this way: "to see that the quality of the commodity which the university pro- 
duces is such as to seem reputable to the class which they represent," "Under 
trustee control," Bourne went on "the American university has been degraded 
from its old, noble ideal of a community of scholarship to a private commercial 
corporation. 4 

Bourne's characterization of the university can be questioned in many re- 
spects, but it nevertheless has an unpleasant ring of authenticity, today even 
more than at the time when he wrote. It will not escape the reader that the 



student movement of the past few years has — quite independently — developed 
a very similar critique, often with the same rhetoric. Again, one can point to 
exaggerations and even flights of fancy, but it would be a mistake to overlook 
the kernel of truth within it. 

A further reason why the problems of the universities have become a more 
urgent concern than heretofore is that the universities have, on an unprecedented 
scale, come to the center of intellectual life. Not only scientists and scholars but 
also writers and artists are drawn to the academic community. To the extent 
that this is true, to the extent that other independent intellectual communities 
disappear, the demands on the university increase. Probably this is a factor in 
the university crises of the past few years. 

With the depoliticization of American society in the 1950s and the narrowing 
of the range of social thought, the university seems to have become, for many 
students, almost the only center of intellectual stimulation. Lionel Trilling, in 
a recent interview, pointed out that he cannot draw on his own experience as 
a student to help him comprehend the motivation of the "militant students" at 
Columbia: 

Like all my friends at college, I hadn't the slightest interest in the 
university as an institution: I thought of it, when I thought of it at 
all, as the inevitable philistine condition of one's being given leisure, 
a few interesting teachers, and a library. I find it hard to believe 
that this isn't the natural attitude. 5 

This is an apt comment. In the past, it was for the most part the football 
and fraternity crowd who had an interest in the university as such. But in this 
respect there have been substantial changes. Now it is generally the most serious 
and thoughtful students who are concerned with the nature of the universities 
and who feel hurt and deprived by its failings. Twenty years ago [in 1949], these 
students — in an urban university at least — would have looked elsewhere for the 
intellectual and social life that they now expect the university to provide. 

Personally, I feel that the sharp challenges that have been raised by the 
student movement are among the few hopeful developments of these troubled 
years. It would be superficial, and even rather childish, to be so mesmerized 
by occasional absurdities of formulation or offensive acts as to fail to see the 
great significance of the issues that have been raised and that lie beneath the 
tumult. Only one totally lacking in judgment could find himself offended by 
"student extremism" and not, to an immensely greater extent, by the events 
and situations that motivate it. A person who can write such words as the 
following has, to put it as kindly as possible, lost his grasp of reality: 

Quite a few of our universities have already decided that the only 
way to avoid on-campus riots is to give students academic credit 
for off-campus rioting ("fieldwork" in the ghettos, among migrant 
workers, etc.). 6 

Consider the assumptions that would lead one to describe work in the ghettos 
or among migrant workers as a form of "rioting," or, for that matter, to regard 



work of this sort as necessarily inappropriate to a college program — as distinct, 
say, from work on biological warfare or counterinsurgency, which is not described 
in these terms. Less extreme, but still seriously distorted, is the perception of 
the student movement expressed by George Kennan, who is concerned with 
what he sees as 

the extremely disturbed and excited state of mind of a good portion 
of our student youth, floundering around as it is in its own terrifying 
wilderness of drugs, pornography, and political hysteria. 7 

Again, it is striking that he is so much less concerned with the "extremely 
disturbed and excited state of mind" of those responsible for the fact that the 
tonnage of bombs dropped on South Vietnam exceeds the total expended by 
the U.S. Air Force in all theaters of World War II, or with those responsible for 
the anti-communist "political hysteria" of the 1950s, or, for that matter, with 
that great mass of students who are still "floundering around" in the traditional 
atmosphere of conformism and passivity of the colleges and whose rioting is 
occasioned by football victories. 

The irrationality which has been all too characteristic of the response to the 
student movement is itself a remarkable phenomenon, worthy of analysis. More 
important, however, is the effort to take the challenge presented by the student 
movement as a stimulus to critical thinking and social action, perhaps of a quite 
radical nature — a necessity in a society as troubled as ours, and as dangerous. 

Since World War II we have spent over a trillion dollars on "defense" and 
are now spending billions on an infantile competition to place a man on the 
moon. Our scientists and technologists are preparing to construct an antiballis- 
tic missile system [ABM] at an ultimate cost of many billions of dollars though 
they know that it will contribute nothing to defense, that in fact it will raise 
a potentially suicidal arms race to new heights. At the same time, our cities 
crumble, and millions suffer hunger and want, while those who try to publicize 
these conditions are investigated by the FBI. It is intolerable that our society 
should continue to arrogate to itself — in part for consumption, in part for uncon- 
scionable waste — half of the far-from-limitless material resources of the world. 
There are simply no words to describe our willingness to destroy, on a scale 
without parallel in the contemporary world, when our leaders detect a threat to 
the "national goals" that they formulate, and that a passive and docile citizenry 
accepts. 

It may appear to be an extreme judgment when a social scientist, a native 
of Pakistan, asserts that "America has institutionalized even its genocide," re- 
ferring to the fact that the extermination of Indians "has become the object 
of public entertainment and children's games. 8 A look at school texts confirms 
his assessment, however. Consider the following description in a fourth-grade 
reader of the extermination of the Pequot tribe by Captain John Mason: 

His little army attacked in the morning before it was light and took 
the Pequots by surprise. The soldiers broke down the stockade with 
their axes, rushed inside, and set fire to the wigwams. They killed 



nearly all the braves, squaws, and children, and burned their corn 
and other food. There were no Pequots left to make more trouble. 
When the other Indian tribes saw what good fighters the white men 
were, they kept the peace for many years. 

"I wish I were a man and had been there," thought Robert. 9 

A child who acquires such attitudes in the school will become the man who can 
behave in the way described by a British eyewitness: 

I asked one American who had just ordered a strike on some huts 
and sampans (blowing the latter to bits with parts of the boat and 
the bodies flying in all directions) if air attacks like that did not 
kill many harmless civilians. "But people shouldn't continue to live 
here," he said. 10 

[Critical analysis of our institutions and ideology] 

It is hardly necessary to add that attitudes created in the schools are supported 
by the mass media, not only directly but by their encouragement of a general 
passivity. There is much truth in the observation of Paul Lazarsfeld and Robert 
Merton that 

these media not only continue to affirm the status quo, but in the 
same measure, they fail to raise essential questions about the struc- 
ture of society. Hence by leading toward conformism and by provid- 
ing little basis for a critical appraisal of society, the commercially 
sponsored media indirectly but effectively restrain the cogent devel- 
opment of a genuinely critical outlook. 11 

This is not the place for an extended discussion; it is enough to point out 
that, for reasons suggested in these few remarks, it is a matter of great urgency, 
for ourselves and for world society, that our institutions and ideology be sub- 
jected to serious critical analysis. The universities must be a primary object 
of such analysis and, at the same time, must provide the "institutional form" 
within which it can be freely conducted. In these specific historical circum- 
stances, it is useful to recall a remark of Bertrand Russell: 

Without rebellion, mankind would stagnate, and injustice would be 
irremediable. The man who refuses to obey authority has, there- 
fore, in certain circumstances, a legitimate function, provided his 
disobedience has motives which are social rather than personal. 12 

It is these historical circumstances that define the context for a study of the 
function of the university and the current challenge to the university. 

Reactions to the recent wave of student unrest throughout the world have 
varied widely. Nathan Glazer asks "whether the student radicals fundamen- 
tally represent a better world that can come into being, or whether they are 



not committed to outdated and romantic visions that cannot be realized, that 
contradict fundamentally other desires and hopes they themselves possess, and 
that contradict even more the desires of most other people." He tends toward 
the latter view; the student radicals remind him "more of the Luddite machine 
smashers than the Socialist trade unionists who achieved citizenship and power 
for workers. 13 Consider, in contrast, the reaction of Paul Ricoeur to the massive 
rebellion of French students in May 1968: 

The signs are now eloquent. The West has entered into a cultural 
revolution which is distinctively its own, the revolution of the ad- 
vanced industrial societies, even if it echoes or borrows from the 
Chinese revolution. It is a cultural revolution because it questions 
the world- vision, the conception of life, that underlie the economic 
and political structures and the totality of human relations. This 
revolution attacks capitalism not only because it fails to bring about 
social justice but also because it succeeds too well in deluding men 
by its own inhuman commitment to quantitative well-being. It at- 
tacks bureaucracy not only because it is burdensome and ineffectual, 
but because it places men in the role of slaves in relation to the to- 
tality of powers, of structures and hierarchical relations from which 
they have become estranged. Finally, it attacks the nihilism of a so- 
ciety which, like a cancerous tissue, has no purpose beyond its own 
growth. Confronted with a senseless society, this cultural revolution 
tries to find the way to the creation of goods, of ideas, of values, in 
relation to their ends. The enterprise is gigantic; it will take years, 
decades, a century 14 

Glazer (like Brzezinski — see note 7) sees the student rebels as Luddites, dis- 
placed and unable to find their role in the new society of advanced technology 
and complex social management. They "come from the fields that have a re- 
stricted and ambiguous place in contemporary society. 15 Ricoeur, on the other 
hand, expresses a very different perception: in the advanced industrial societies 
in the coming years there will be a sharp conflict between the centralizing force 
of a technical bureaucracy, managing society for dubious ends, and the forces 
that seek to reconstruct social life on a more human scale on the basis of "partic- 
ipation" and popular control. Both interpretations sense that a major historical 
process is under way. They differ in their judgment as to where they expect 
(and no doubt hope) it will end, and correspondingly in the interpretation they 
give of student dissidence and rebellion. Both expect the university to be at 
the center of the conflict. Optimists may hope that it will be in the eye of the 
hurricane — but it is more realistic to expect that it will continue to be caught 
up in controversy and turmoil. 

It is hardly in doubt that we are in the midst of a historical process of 
centralization and bureaucratization not only in the economy but also in politics 
and social organization. The crisis of parliamentary institutions is a worldwide 
phenomenon. 16 Reactions can be seen not only in the university rebellions but 
also in the search for forms of community organization and control — which have 



9 



forced their way onto the front pages in recent months — and even, it seems, 
in tentative gropings toward more direct worker control, often in opposition to 
the highly bureaucratized trade unions that are increasingly more remote from 
the day-to-day concerns of those whom the leadership claims to represent. 17 In 
Eastern Europe there are somewhat analogous developments. 

[Commitment to a "few marketplace of ideas"] 

The student movement must, I believe, be understood in this more general 
context. The universities will not be able to isolate themselves from the profound 
social conflict that appears likely, though its course can hardly be guessed. The 
linkage of the universities to other social institutions, noted earlier, guarantees 
this. In fact, there may be very serious questioning, in coming years, of the basic 
assumption of modern society that development of technology is inherently a 
desirable, inevitable process; and with it, a critique of the role of the university 
in advancing knowledge and technique and putting it to use. When students in 
Western Europe take as their war cry the chant "Ho, Ho, Ho Chi Minh," they are 
not merely protesting the Vietnam War and the crushing of the poor by the rich 
that it symbolizes; they are also reacting against the values of industrial society, 
protesting the role assigned to them as managers of this society, and rejecting 
the kind of rationality uninformed by any sense of justice, which — as they see it, 
with considerable accuracy — translates into practice as the knowledge how to 
preserve privilege and order but not how to meet human needs. The American 
student movement is also animated in part by such concerns. 

In many respects, the university is a legitimate target for protest. The un- 
flattering portrait given by such critics as James Ridgeway may be overdrawn, 
but it is basically realistic, and quite properly disturbing to the concerned stu- 
dent. 18 Recognition of these characteristics of the university leads to revulsion 
and often militancy. Nevertheless, the problem brought to the surface may be 
irresoluble within the framework of the university itself. 

Consider, for example, the matter of government contracts for research. It 
is a classic liberal ideal, echoed also by Marx, that "government and church 
should. . .be equally excluded from any influence on the school. 19 On the other 
hand, there is little doubt that government research contracts provide a hidden 
subsidy to the academic budget by supporting faculty research which would 
otherwise have to be subsidized by the university. Furthermore, it is quite 
probable that the choice of research topics, in the sciences at least, is influenced 
very little by the source of funds, at least in the major universities. It is doubtful 
that scientific education can continue at a reasonable level without this kind 
of support. Radical students will certainly ask themselves why support from 
the Defense Department is more objectionable than support from capitalist 
institutions — ultimately, from profits derived by exploitation — or support by 
tax-free gifts that in effect constitute a levy on the poor to support the education 
of the privileged. 20 

One legacy of classical liberalism that we must fight to uphold with unending 



10 



vigilance, in the universities and without, is the commitment to a "free market- 
place of ideas." To a certain extent, this commitment is merely verbal. The task, 
however, is to extend, not to limit, such freedom as exists — and this freedom is 
not inconsiderable. Students are right to ask why faculty members should be 
permitted to contribute to the weapons cult or to work on counterinsurgency. 
They also point out, with much justice, that it is unreasonable to claim that 
this is simply a freely undertaken commitment. Access to funds, power, and 
influence is open to those who undertake this work, but not, say, to those who 
would prefer to study ways in which poorly armed guerillas might combat an 
enemy with overwhelming technological superiority. Were the university truly 
"neutral and value-free," one kind of work would — as noted earlier — be as well 
supported as the other. 

The argument is valid but does not change the fact that the commitment 
is nevertheless undertaken with eagerness and a belief that it is right. Only 
coercion could eliminate the freedom to undertake such work. Once the principle 
is established that coercion is legitimate in this domain, it is rather clear against 
whom it will be used. And the principle of legitimacy of coercion would destroy 
the university as a serious institution; it would destroy its value to a free society. 
This must be recognized even in the light of the undeniable fact that the freedom 
falls far short of the ideal. 

In certain respects, the specific issue of Defense Department funding of re- 
search is a misleading one. Research on chemical and biological warfare or 
counterinsurgency would be no more benign if funded by the National Institutes 
of Health or the Social Science Research Council, just as work on high-energy 
physics is not corrupted if funding comes through the Department of Defense. 
The important question is the nature of the work and the uses to which it is 
likely to be put, not the bureaucratic issue of the source of the funding. The 
latter is of some significance, insofar as one might argue that the Pentagon gains 
respectability and power by its support of serious research. For American soci- 
ety as a whole, this development is a very minor symptom of a real tragedy, the 
ongoing and perhaps irreversible militarization of American society. But in the 
particular case of the universities, these considerations seem to me marginal. 
Another side issue, in my opinion, is the question of a campus base for military 
research. In fact, the Vietnamese care very little whether the counterinsurgency 
technology that is used to destroy and repress them is developed in the halls 
of the university or in private spin-offs on its periphery 21 And to the victims of 
the endless arms race — the present victims of the waste of resources, material 
and intellectual, that are desperately needed elsewhere, or the possible future 
victims of a devastating catastrophe — it is of little interest whether their fate 
is determined in a Department of Death on the university campus or in Los 
Alamos or Fort Detrick, hundreds of miles away. To move such work off cam- 
pus is socially irrelevant. It might, in fact, even be a regressive step. It might 
be argued that as long as such work continues, it would be preferable for it 
to be done on campus, where it can become a focus for student activism and 
protest that may not only impede such work but also contribute to growing 
public awareness. 



11 



One of the most hopeful signs, in my opinion, is the increase in concern 
among students over the problem of the uses of research. There are few today 
who would agree with the judgment of Edward Teller that "we must trust our 
social processes" to make the best use of technological advance and "must not 
be deterred by arguments involving consequences or costs. 22 The question of the 
uses of technology is multifaceted: it involves complex historical and political 
judgments as well as technical issues. Properly, it should be faced by students 
at a time in life when they are free to explore the many dimensions of the 
problems and supported by a community with like concerns, rather than isolated 
in a competitive job market. For such reasons the problems of campus-based 
military research seem to me rather complex. 



[Goals of university reform] 



Those who believe that radical social change is imperative in our society are 
faced with a dilemma when they consider university reform. They want the 
university to be a free institution, and they want the individuals in it to use this 
freedom in a civilized way. They observe that the university — or to be more 
precise, many of its members — is "lined up in the service of the war technique" 
and that it often functions in such a way as to entrench privilege and support 
repression. 

Given this largely correct observation, it is easy to move to some serious mis- 
conceptions. It is simply false to claim — as many now do — that the university 
exists only to provide manpower for the corporate system, or that the univer- 
sity (and the society) permit no meaningful work, or that the university merely 
serves to coerce and "channel" the student into a socially accepted lifestyle and 
ideology, even though it is true that the temptation to make choices that will 
lead in these directions is very great. To an overwhelming extent, the features 
of university life that rightly are offensive to many concerned students result 
not from trustee control, not from defense contracts, not from administrative 
decisions, but from the relatively free choices of faculty and students. Hence the 
dilemma noted above. "Restructuring the university" is unlikely to be effective 
in eliminating the features of the institution that have sparked student criti- 
cism. In fact, many of the concrete proposals that I have seen are, I suspect, 
likely to have the opposite effect; namely, they may lead toward a system of 
enforceable regulations that may appear democratic on paper but will limit the 
individual freedom that exists in an institution that is highly decentralized and 
rather loose in its structure of decision making and administration, hence fairly 
responsive to the wishes of its members. 

It is possible to imagine useful reforms; I suspect, however, that they will 
have at best a small effect on the way the university functions. The real problem 
is a much deeper one: to change the choices and personal commitment of the 
individuals who make up the university. This is much harder than modification 
of formal structures and is not likely to be effected by such restructuring in any 
very serious way. 



12 



More to the point, I believe, is the view expressed in the Port Huron State- 
ment of 1962, more or less the founding document of SDS [Students for a Demo- 
cratic Society]: 

The university is located in a permanent position of social influence. 
Its educational function makes it indispensable and automatically 
makes it a crucial institution in the formation of social attitudes. In 
an unbelievably complicated world, it is the central institution for 
organizing, evaluating, and transmitting knowledge.. .. Social rele- 
vance, the accessibility to knowledge, and internal openness — these 
together make the university a potential base and agency in the 
movement of social change. 

Any new left in America must be, in large measure, a left with 
real intellectual skills, committed to deliberativeness, honesty, and 
reflection as working tools. The university permits the political life 
to be an adjunct to the academic one, and action to be informed by 
reason. 

University reform, in my opinion, should be directed toward such goals as 
these: not toward imposing constraints, but rather toward lessening them; not 
toward enjoining the work that now is often dominant — much of which I per- 
sonally find detestable — but toward opening up alternatives. This can be done, 
I think, though it will require a degree of intellectual commitment that has, by 
and large, been lacking on the part of those concerned with university reform. 

The university should compensate for the distorting factors introduced by 
external demands, which necessarily reflect the distribution of power in extra- 
university society, and by the dynamics of professionalization, which, though 
not objectionable in itself, often tends to orient study toward problems that 
can be dealt with by existing techniques and away from those that require new 
understanding. The university should be a center for radical social inquiry, as it 
is already a center for what might be called radical inquiry in the pure sciences. 
For example, it should loosen its institutional forms even further, to permit a 
richer variety of work and study and experimentation, and it should provide a 
home for the free intellectual, for the social critic, for the irreverent and radical 
thinking that is desperately needed if we are to escape from the dismal reality 
that threatens to overwhelm us. The primary barrier to such development will 
not be the unwillingness of administrators or the stubbornness of trustees. It 
will be the unwillingness of students to do the difficult and serious work required 
and the fear of the faculty that its security and authority, its guild structure, 
will be threatened. 

These, I think, are the real barriers to serious reform and innovation in the 
universities as matters now stand, though new barriers may arise if these are 
successfully overcome. These are the primary problems that should motivate 
and direct efforts to change the university. In general, I think that the so- 
called new left has a task of historic importance; and I think that this task was 
formulated quite fittingly in the Port Huron statement when it spoke of the 



13 



necessity for "a left with real intellectual skills, committed to deliberativeness, 
honesty, and reflection as working tools," committed to a political life in which 
"action is informed by reason." 

These are goals that can easily be forgotten in the heat of conflict, but 
they remain valid ones, and one can only hope that they will continually be 
resurrected as a guide to positive action. 

Notes 

Wilhelm von Humboldt, "On the inner and outer organization of the higher institutions 
of learning in Berlin," parts translated in Marianne Cowan, ed., Humanist without portfolio 
(Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1963). 

Daniel Bell, "The scholar concerned, 11 American Scholar 37, 3 (1968): 401-6. 

Christopher Jencks and David Riesman, The academic revolution (New York: Doubleday, 
1968), pp. 104, 100. 

The world of Randolph Bourne, ed. Lillian Schlissel (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1965), 
pp. 198, 85, 87. I do not intend my citation of these remarks to suggest approval of what is 
asserted or implied — as that universities were once a noble community of scholarship, or that 
the "academic workman" should have a status different from other employees. The "academic 
workman 11 is not the only one who should be freed from serving as a tool of production. 
^Partisan Review 35, 2 (1968). 

Irving Kristol, "A different way to restructure the university," New York Times Magazine, 
Dec. 8, 1968. No less revealing is his next sentence: "And at Harvard — of all places! — there 
is now a course (Social Relations 148) which enrolls several hundred students and is given for 
credit, whose curriculum is devised by the SDS, whose classes are taught by SDS sympathizers, 
and whose avowed aim is 'radicalization 1 of the students. 11 Why, in fact, is it so scandalous 
that Harvard ( "of all places!" ) should have a student-initiated course offering a radical critique 
of American society and its international behavior? 

George Kennan, speech to the International Association for Cultural Freedom on Dec. 2, 
1968, at Princeton, N.J.; New York Times, Dec. 4, 1968. Zbigniew Brzezinski, who interprets 
the student movement as basically "Luddite, 11 describes Kennan as "in a mood of rage at the 
young." 

Eqbal Ahmad, in No More Vietnams? ed. Richard M. Pfeffer (New York: Harper and 
Row, 1968), p. 18. 

9 Harold B. Clifford, Exploring New England (Chicago: Follett: 1961), p. 11. 
10 Richard West, Sketches from Vietnam (London: Jonathan Cape, Ltd., 1968), pp. 97-98. 

Paul Lazarsfeld and Robert Merton, "Mass Communication, popular taste, and organized 
social action, in W.L. Schramm, ed., Mass communications (Urbana: University of Illinois 
Press, 1949); quoted by D. W. Smythe and H. Wilson in a study in which they conclude that 
"the principal function of the commercially supported mass media in the United States is to 
market the output of the consumer goods industries and to train the population for loyalty 
to the American economic-political system" ("Cold War-mindedness and the mass media," in 
Struggle against history, ed. N. D. Houghton [New York: Washington Square Press, 1908], 
pp. 71-72). 

Power (New York: W. W. Norton, 1938), p. 252. He concludes his essay with these 
words (p. 305): "just as we teach children to avoid being destroyed by motor cars if we can, 
so we should teach them to avoid being destroyed by cruel fanatics, and to preserve, as far as 
possible, the instinctive joy of life that is natural to healthy children. This is the task of a 
liberal education: to give a sense of the value of things other than domination, to help create 
wise citizens of a free community, and through the combination of citizenship with liberty in 
individual creativeness to enable men to give to human life that splendor which some few men 
have shown that it can achieve." 

Nathan Glazer, "'Student Power 1 in Berkeley," Public Interest 13 (1968). 
14 Le Monde, June 9-10, 1968. 

Glazer, "'Student power 1 in Berkeley." 



14 



For some illuminating discussion, see Michael Kidron, Western capitalism since the war 
(London: George Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 1968). 
17 Ibid. 

18 James Ridgeway, The closed corporation (New York: Random House, 1968). 
Karl Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme (1875). 

Cf. ibid.: "If in some states of [the United States] the higher education institutions are 
also 'free,' that only means in fact defraying the cost of the education of the upper classes 
from the general tax receipts." 

As it continues to be. For example, one of the initiators of Project Cambridge at MIT, 
Professor Ithiel Pool, states that this $7.6 million project will "strengthen" research in coun- 
terinsurgency (Scientific Research, September 15, 1969). At the same time, he characterizes 
student protests that this will be the case as "a lot of hogwash." 

22 "Teller urges strong nuclear management," Aviation Week and Space Technology, April 
23, 1963. We must push "scientific advancements to the limit," Teller urges, "the military 
requirements will soon follow." Concerns over "the best human use of the advances already 
achieved" is in his view "an extremely grave symptom," which threatens the "whole dynamic 
civilization of the West, for which America is the spearhead." 

23 Students for a Democratic Society, Port Huron Statement (1962), reprinted in Mitchell 
Cohen and Dennis Hale, eds., The new student left, rev. ed. (Boston: Beacon Press, 1967). 



15 



