
STOP 



Early Journal Content on JSTOR, Free to Anyone in the World 

This article is one of nearly 500,000 scholarly works digitized and made freely available to everyone in 
the world by JSTOR. 

Known as the Early Journal Content, this set of works include research articles, news, letters, and other 
writings published in more than 200 of the oldest leading academic journals. The works date from the 
mid-seventeenth to the early twentieth centuries. 

We encourage people to read and share the Early Journal Content openly and to tell others that this 
resource exists. People may post this content online or redistribute in any way for non-commercial 
purposes. 

Read more about Early Journal Content at http://about.jstor.org/participate-jstor/individuals/early- 
journal-content . 



JSTOR is a digital library of academic journals, books, and primary source objects. JSTOR helps people 
discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content through a powerful research and teaching 
platform, and preserves this content for future generations. JSTOR is part of ITHAKA, a not-for-profit 
organization that also includes Ithaka S+R and Portico. For more information about JSTOR, please 
contact support@jstor.org. 



THE NEW THEORIES OF ECONOMICS. 

Several criticisms of a work J that I have recently published 
have shown me that certain points of view from which the new 
economic theories can be considered have not been thoroughly 
understood. In this paper I propose to give a brief expose of 
these theories. 

The present study is purely objective. It is not my intention 
to point out the part played by the various economists in the 
formulation of the new theories, nor have I attempted to separate 
the large amount of work done by my predecessors from my own 
modest contribution. If I sometimes speak in my own name, I do 
so merely to avoid placing the responsibility on other writers 
for errors I may have introduced into their theories. 

As a matter of fact, art has always preceded science. When 
in the course of the evolution of human knowledge art and 
science have drifted apart, critics have never been wanting who 
were ready to assert that science was productive of no useful 
results. Criticisms of this kind are largely founded on the fact 
that a science has not nearly so immediate a utility as the cog- 
nate art. It is also to be said that art cannot confine itself to its 
teaching function ; it must also demonstrate its persuasive power. 
Consequently art is obliged to make use of certain rhetorical 
devices with which science has nothing to do. As the most 
persuasive reasoning is not always the soundest, it happens that 
economic science often differs from economic art in the means of 
expression employed. Science considers means of expression 
solely from the point of view of their power to disclose the 
truth, whereas art must primarily consider their efficiency as 
means of persuasion. From this it follows that economic sci- 
ence will not hesitate to use mathematics, philology, physiology, 
etc.; whereas art can draw upon these sciences to but a very 

1 Cours (ticonomie politique; Lusanne, F. Rouge, 1896, 2 vols. 

485 



486 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 

limited extent for fear of not being understood by the majority 
of those it undertakes to persuade. 

It is not my intention at this point to consider the general 
question of the utility of the pure sciences. In passing it may 
be said by way of illustration that any person who believes in 
the uselessness of the science of astronomy will act prudently in 
not reading a book the title of which shows that it treats of this 
subject. On the other hand, if he enjoys reading works on this 
science it would be foolish for him to stop at every page to 
express the wish that the author had written a more valuable 
work, e. g., a trade almanac. It is also to be thoroughly under- 
stood that a question may legitimately be entirely ignored or 
wholly put aside, but if it is considered at all it must be treated 
as fully as the resources of the science at the time permit. 

There can be no doubt that the exact and real sense of the 
famous phrase of Tacitus : Agri pro numero cultoriim ab universis 
in vices occupantur, quos mox inter se secundum dignationem partiuntur 
.... has nothing to do with the present welfare of humanity. 
A statesman having in hand the passage of a law affecting the 
landed property of his country might therefore be justly con- 
demned were he to waste his time in trying to find out the mean- 
ing of this phrase. Any person who might have the time and 
curiosity to know exactly what had been the system of property 
among the Germans must needs read the principal authors who 
have studied this famous phrase of Tacitus. After having once 
taken up the task it would, however, be very annoying to be 
interrupted in one's study by the remark of an intruder to this 
effect : " You are wasting your time. You use too much Latin ; 
you make a mistake in quoting Greek so often, for many cannot 
read that language. The ancient Germans and their land system 
are not in my line." To the last remark I can only reply that if 
you are not interested in a certain line of work you would do 
better not to interfere but let those proceed without interruption 
who are interested in the particular subject and who will take 
the pains to investigate it in every way calculated to lead them 
to the truth. 



THE NEIV THEORIES OF ECONOMICS 487 

To acquire wealth may be pleasanter than only to know the 
manner in which it is distributed. For my part, were I of the 
opinion that a certain book would contribute more than any 
other to establish free trade in the world at large I would not 
hesitate an instant to give myself up heart and soul to the study 
of this particular work, putting aside for the time all study of 
pure science. The man in whose power it might be to find out 
the means of alleviating the sufferings of the poor would have 
done a far greater deed than the one who contents himself solely 
with knowing the exact numbers of poor and wealthy people in 
society. However, if anyone wished to pursue such a line of 
study, he should be left at liberty to use such means as may 
enable him to discover the law according to which incomes 
vary. 

In speaking of a mathematical formula that gives an approx- 
imate expression of this law, Professor Charles Gide says that 
"the latter is endowed with no power, either of intimidating or 
discouraging any one of those who aspire to a greater equality 
of social conditions ; " which is equivalent to saying that astro- 
nomical studies will not have the power "of intimidating or dis- 
couraging" lovers in the choice of a star of their own. The 
investigator who is in search of the law of the distribution of 
wealth does not aim to encourage or dissuade anyone ; he is 
simply intent on discovering the truth. This does not imply 
that some questions are not of greater importance from a 
strictly scientific view than others. Thus mechanics affords us 
the means of studying the movements of celestial bodies which 
attract each other according to a given law, but it is obvious 
that in this study special attention will center on the movements 
which take place in so far as bodies are subject to attraction 
under this law and that no time will be wasted in exhaustive 
study of other laws that have nothing to do with the matter in 
hand. 

Let us therefore put aside, once for all, discussions regarding 
the greater or less utility of science or its power of persuading 
anyone to choose for himself between alternatives, and let us 



488 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 

direct our attention solely to the laws governing certain phenom- 
ena. A reader who may have no interest in following a discus- 
sion on this line may as well discontinue his reading. Voltaire 
tells how Micromegas descended to earth and observed man- 
kind. Micromegas, before he could fully comprehend human 
actions, would have to perceive that a large class of activities 
aims at providing what is useful or pleasant, that another class of 
actions depends on the sentiment arising from the mutual attrac- 
tion between the sexes, and that there is a third class which 
does not aim directly at the enjoyments of sense. This third 
class of actions proceeds on certain sentiments called moral, 
religious, patriotic, etc. Micromegas, if he is to make progress 
in the study of this great number of actions going on before 
him, must soon see the necessity of classifying the activities and 
examining each class separately. This ordering of things is 
needful in every line of study. It would not do to blend the 
study of anatomy with that of chemistry. This does not in the 
least imply that the anatomist underrates chemistry, or vice 
versa ; it only says that but one subject can be advantageously 
investigated at a time. 

Economic questions up to this time have too often been con- 
strued to coincide with questions of law. The time has now 
come to separate the two, just as in its time a separation was 
made between chemistry and physics. What are the economic 
results of strikes ? This is a question distinct from the other 
question as to whether laborers have or have not the right to 
organize strikes. Nothing is gained, from a scientific point of 
view, in not separating these two very different questions. . It 
must also be well understood that in dealing with a practical 
case both questions must be solved. Science proceeds by anal- 
ysis, whereas synthesis is required where practice is concerned. 

Propositions that are exclusively scientific are of two kinds : 
(i) descriptive propositions, describing what has taken place — 
so monetary systems are described with reference to time and 
place; (2) hypothetical propositions, which search into what 
would have happened under given specific conditions — so, for 



THE NEW THEORIES OF ECONOMICS 489 

instance, what would happen if paper money were issued in a 
country accustomed to a circulation of gold. 

These two kinds of propositions fairly correspond to those 
which are in mechanics included under the two heads of actual 
and virtual movements. Given a system of material points, the 
problem is to find the actual movements of these points. This 
is a question following under the first head. Of the second 
kind would be the question as to what movements these points 
would describe on the basis of the relations actually existing 
between them. These latter movements, not realized in fact, 
but which might have taken place without violating the condi- 
tions assumed, are what are called virtual movements. 

In my opinion both political economy and social science 
have in view the study of two analogous kinds of movements. 
The first kind constitutes the doctrine of evolution ; it is the 
class of movements to which social science has given the greater 
attention. This class of movements is characteristic of the 
studies which bear the name "historical" in political economy. 
The second class of movements or questions is of interest as 
bearing on the problem what relation given specific facts bear 
to the welfare of humanity ; in other words, what are the poten- 
tial movements conducive to the maximum welfare of humanity? 
In what relation do they stand to actual movements? These 
problems can be solved, if at all, through analysis and abstrac- 
tion. That is to say, an endeavor is to be made to isolate and 
study the principal phenomenon. Those who censure political 
economy for pursuing this method seem to be unaware of the 
fact that all sciences, without exception, must follow this 
method. Certain critics cry out apodictically against the new 
theories as being absurd because they attempt to state economic 
phenomena " in mathematical formula;." But no such pretentious 
attempt has been made. To try to state economic phenomena in 
the shape of mathematical formulae would be very much like the 
physicist trying to apply without modification his mathematical 
formula for the descent of falling bodies in a vacuum to the 
movement of a feather floating on the wind. These critics may 



49° JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 

therefore be told that, far from aiming to express complex phe- 
nomena in a simple formula, economists broadly avow that they 
do not know and will never know the theory of any concrete 
phenomena in all its details. They are solely acquainted with 
ideal phenomena which make a continually closer approxima- 
tion to the concrete cases. Let us take a very simple example 
— the fall of a heavy body. The complete theory of its move- 
ment is unknown. Who, then, can give us the theory of the 
movement of a falling feather? If we simplify our problem by 
supposing a heavy body to be falling in a vacuum and attracted 
by the earth alone, we may infer the well-known theory of fall- 
ing bodies. We thereupon complicate the problem by intro- 
ducing the fact of the air's resistance, and in this way arrive at 
theories approaching more and more closely to reality. 

Such are the considerations which lead to the method of 
successive approximations in political economy. In my Cows I 
have developed this theory more fully, and therefore shall only 
indicate its nature here. 

Rational mechanics gives us a first approximation to the 
theory of the equilibrium and of the movements of bodies. In 
the same way the theories of Jevons, Walras, Marshall, Irving 
Fisher, and others present us with a first approximation to the full 
theory of economic phenomena. It must be clearly understood 
that it is only an approximation ; it is similar to that just made in 
the case of the heavy body supposed to fall in a vacuum. Pure 
economics has no better way of expressing the concrete eco- 
nomic phenomenon than rational mechanics has for representing 
the concrete mechanical one. It is at this point that there is a 
place for mathematics. The problem of pure economics bears 
a striking likeness to that of rational mechanics. Now, in point 
of empirical fact, men have as yet not succeeded in treating the 
latter problem without the aid of mathematics. It therefore 
appears quite legitimate to appeal also to mathematics for 
assistance in the solution of the economic problem. 

Many people think that the advantage arising from the use 
of mathematics consists in making demonstration more rigorous. 



THE NEW THEORIES OF ECONOMICS 491 

This is an error. A demonstration well constructed by the 
method of ordinary logic is just as rigorous as one made by the 
application of that other kind of logic which bears the name of 
mathematics. The advantage of mathematics lies chiefly in 
this, that it permits us to treat problems far more complicated 
than those generally solved by ordinary logic. Most economists 
insist upon the mutual dependence of different economic phe- 
nomena. But a purely verbal recognition of this fact is not all 
that can be done or all that is required. What we want is to 
determine, at least approximately, the relations existing between 
the economic phenomena under discussion and so obtain a clear 
conception of their interdependence. A system of equations 
similar to the one used in mechanics to represent the equilibrium 
and the movement of bodies is afforded by this method of 
approximation. This representation is, no doubt, in this way 
approached in a rough way at best, and yet the approximation 
serves better than nothing. It is better to know that the earth 
is nearly round than to imagine that it is a flat surface. 

Professor Walras' great contribution to economic discussion 
was his discovery of a general system of equations to express 
the economic equilibrium. I cannot, for my part, sufficiently 
admire this portion of his work, but I must add that I entirely 
disagree with him on what he has to say in his work entitled 
Etudes d 'economic socialc. Professor Walras thinks it possible to 
draw certain economic deductions from metaphysical principles 
of jurisprudence. This opinion is worthy of respect, but I am 
unable to accept it. I am a believer in the efficiency of experi- 
mental methods to the exclusion of all others. For me there 
exist no valuable demonstrations except those that are based on 
facts. Foremost among the general problems to be solved by 
mathematics is the question of the determination or indetermin- 
ation of economic problems. It is well known that wherever 
the number of conditions (equations) is equal to the number of 
unknown quantities, a problem is easily solved. This simple con- 
sideration helps us instantly to understand why the so-called " laws 
of maximum prices" contain a logical and formal impossibility. 



492 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 

I have endeavored to extend to dynamic questions the use of 
the equations given for the static equilibrium. The most accu- 
rate description possible of the economic phenomenon is to be 
reached in this way. Is it not a most remarkable fact that a 
system of equations should thus be able to express not only the 
general character of economic phenomena, but every single 
detail as far as we may have any knowledge of them. The entire 
body of economic theory is henceforth bound together in this way 
and knitted into an integral whole. If our equations are con- 
structed each for a homogeneous group, and several of these 
groups are considered, we get the theory of non-competinggroups 
of Cairns and an effectively complete theory of international 
trade, together with an adequate scientific interpretation of the 
theory of comparative cost. By the use of these general form- 
ulas we find the coefficients of production. A consideration of 
their variability leads us up to a recognition of the function of 
the entrepreneurs and to the theory of different systems of pro- 
duction according as we postulate either free competition or 
monopoly or a socialistic regime. It is to be borne in mind that 
consumers are reckoning in terms of marginal utility or "ophel- 
imity," while the entrepreneur is counting in terms of money. 
Some of the criticisms that I have seen might have been unneces- 
sary if account had been taken of this distinction. A consider- 
ation of the size of industrial enterprises leads us to recognize 
that there exists in general a definite maximum at which the 
expansion of enterprises stops under a regime of free competition, 
there being no advantage in increasing them beyond or leaving 
them short of what corresponds to this magnitude. Our general 
formula also directs our attention to the distribution of savings 
among the different uses to which they can be put. From a 
study of the degree of facility T with which savings can be turned 

I I am not at all satisfied with this way of presenting my idea; but to give it more 
precision, without entering into a lengthy explanation, would be quite impossible with- 
out making use of mathematical symbols. The desire to keep mathematical symbols 
out of the text explains why in my Cours the theory of rent appears in the notes. It 
was impossible to give it the desired rigorousness and preciseness without the employ- 
ment of mathematical symbols. 



THE NEW THEORIES OF ECONOMICS 493 

into different species of capital a rigorous theory of rent can 
be deduced. The general equations show us, besides, how the 
economic aggregate is thrown into vibration under the action of 
forces which stimulate it. The study of these vibrations leads 
to a theory of crises. When once the economic aggregate has 
in this way been already apprehended it is easy to understand 
that the divisions into which we break up the aggregate in 
studying separately exchange, production, and capitalization are 
quite arbitrary, although they may be useful helps in study. In 
reality these three operations are simultaneous. If this be so it 
becomes absolutely necessary to consider them again as a whole 
after having examined them in isolation — to make a synthesis 
after having analyzed the phenomena. This general conception 
of economic aggregate finds an analogy in the conception which 
an astronomer has of the solar system when he has apprehended 
the general equations of mechanics. 

It is to be borne in mind that, since any economic phenome- 
non requires time for its completion, the amount of goods under 
consideration in any given case is the quantity which is pro- 
duced and consumed in a given period of time. Besides this 
the use of capital could not be conceived apart from the time 
relation. Professor Irving Fisher has developed these consider- 
ations with much ability. 

The general equations of the economic equilibrium are 
obtained on the hypothesis of a decreasing marginal utility, and 
it therefore becomes necessary to ask whether these equations 
yield results which are borne out by experience. This, indeed, 
is the only adequate demonstration of the propositions that 
political economy claims as its own and makes the subject of its 
discussion. The first part of the argument is of use only as 
drawing the conclusions from certain hypotheses, and says noth- 
ing as to their validity as statements of concrete facts. To test 
their validity in this respect deductions must be compared with 
experience; (i) because this affords the definitive proof of the 
hypotheses already made, which until this test be made remain 
probable only — a priori ; and (2) because it affords a means of 



494 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 

testing whether this means of presenting economic phenomena 
really exhibits the substantial bearing of the phenomena in 
question. 

So, for instance, experience teaches us in a general way that 
the quantity of goods demanded by consumers decreases with an 
increase in their price. Do or do not the general equations of 
the economic equilibrium lead us to this conclusion on theoret- 
ical grounds ? If the question is answered in the affirmative the 
ground for accepting the general equations is strengthened, 
whilst if it is answered in the negative the general equations in 
question must be rejected. Many of the critics who have com- 
mented upon my Cours have not understood this to be the case ; 
they very erroneously imagined that when thus comparing my 
deductions with facts I intended thereby to prove the latter. 
But a fact cannot be demonstrated — it must be observed ; it can 
then be used to test the validity of a deduction. Even the 
simplest and most elementary facts are to be made use of in 
making these verifications. From a failure to appreciate this 
rule of procedure critics have been led to make such reflections 
on my work as the following : 

"After a long deduction from a formula he states that the 
truthfulness of that which is deduced can be seen at once from 
simpler considerations. Such overfondness for mathematical 
machinery strengthens the impression that exists among many 
that this machinery is capable only of grinding out truisms." 

Remarks of exactly similar tenor might be made upon the 
discussion of light-interference on the basis of the well-known 
equations of light-vibrations. But the theory of undulations 
does not and cannot demonstrate the phenomena of inter- 
ference ; on the contrary it is on the ground of these phenom- 
ena that the theory is accepted. The general equations of the 
economic equilibrium are not of avail for demonstrating the law 
of supply and demand ; on the contrary, the equations which 
represent the chief phenomena of supply and demand are proven 
by experience. There is no truism in all this. The accuracy 
and therefore the value of a calculating machine might well be 



THE NEW THEORIES OF ECONOMICS 495 

tested by an actual operation, e. g., multiplying 15 by 12 and 
comparing the product with the result obtained by the usual 
method. But this verification must not be considered a demon- 
stration, and it must not be said that an expensive and compli- 
cated machine has been constructed for the sole purpose of 
multiplying 15 by 12. Another writer, Mr. H. L. Moore, 
repeats the foregoing objection 1 in nearly the same words. He 
says: "After making the complex development, he points out 
that substantially the same results might be obtained without 
the use of differential calculus. Professor Pareto cannot expect 
to reconcile his non-mathematical reader with this method of 
confusing him by telling him (§ 56) that if he does not 
understand the mathematical explanations he will have all the 
advantage in learning the language in which they are given ! " 
Mr. Moore would convey the impression to his readers that the 
observation he quotes concerns this truism ; but this is not the 
case. My observation concern those results that cannot be 
reached otherwise, while the inference which can be made 
"without the use of differential calculus" is a simple verification. 
Similar verifications are to be found in any treatise upon 
mechanics ; but that such may be the case Mr. Moore does not 
seem to realize. If the rebuke administered by this acute critic 
is merited in the case just cited, it is also merited in numerous 
other cases which seem to have escaped him, for the instances 
of such resort to verification in my Cours are numerous. Now it 
is precisely because the general formula; of economic equilibrium 
cover a large number of economic questions which can be dem- 
onstrated in other ways, often very simple, that we take these 
formulas to represent this whole range of the economic phe- 
nomena. 2 

1 Annals of (tie American Academy, May 1897. 

2 The same critic says : "A curious slip for a mathematic economist is made in the 
discussion of population, a slip that parallels the error of Malthus." To substantiate 
this he isolates a phrase which he finds in the text — where there are no mathematics 
— and gives it to the reader under the impression that to prove that the progress of 
wealth in England has not followed the law laid down by Malthus I furnish but this 
single ground of inference, viz., that between two given epochs the growth ol wealth 



496 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 

For a like reason I have used every occasion to verify my 
theoretical deductions by statistics and history on this subject ; 
J. S. Mill's work on logic contains several pages which it might 
be worth the while for some of our critics to reread. 

In the early stages of every science there is apt to be a good 
deal of reasoning about terms rather than about the things 
themselves. This method of procedure, however, is not entirely 
erroneous. Words are often the depositories of the experience 
of men, and so long as a new-born science has not succeeded in 
accumulating for itself a sufficient aggregate of direct experi- 
ence it may find it advantageous to have recourse to the com- 
mon fund of experience more or less vaguely represented by 
words. There comes a time, however, in the development of 
science at which the fund formed by direct experience becomes 
sufficient and at which the disadvantages attached to the vague- 
ness of experience, such as is given us by everyday words, out- 
weighs the advantages to be derived from them. This is pre- 
cisely the state of affairs in political economy. I believe this 

has been more rapid than that of population. He then argues at length to show that 

one can always make out an arithmetical progression in such form that its terms, 

within given limits, will be greater than those of a given geometrical progression. 

Without giving in detail " the complex development " of my critic's argument, it may 

be characterized as equivalent to the proposition that it is always possible to show 

that within given limits the ordinates of a straight line will be larger than those 

of a given curve. The reader who may not be satisfied with Mr. Moore's assertion on 

this point, and who may be willing to take the trouble to verify the case by reference 

to my Cours, will find (Vol. I, page 341) the following expression for the gross income 

in England : 

R— 346.30 X I0°- OII °4t 

The following words, which explain the phrase isolated by Mr. Moore, should 
also be read : "On voit que la raison de la progression est beaucoup plus rapide que 
celle qui a etc trouvee (211 1 ) pour l'augmentation de la population. C'est ce qui 
explique comment la richesse par tete d'habitant a augmente considerablement." 

Accordingly, in the text I have observed that in England wealth has grown more 
rapidly than population, and in the notes I have furnished the precise expression for 
the geometrical progression which has been followed by the growth of wealth. Is it 
not " a curious slip " for a critic not to have seen this ? The reason why the explana- 
tion has to be sought for in the notes is simply this, — it could not be given without 
the use of mathematics and I desired to keep mathematics out of the text. In con- 
clusion it may be said that it should not be deemed unnecessary to read the book one 
attempts to criticise. 



THE NEW THEORIES OF ECONOMICS 497 

science would gain a great advantage by developing a terminol- 
ogy of its own, just as chemistry, physics, and anatomy have 
done. But in this transition period many persons judge of 
works which are written according to the new methods as if 
they had been written according to the principles which have 
prevailed in the past. As a consequence, criticisms which I 
consider of absolutely no value have been made upon the ter- 
minology which I have chosen to employ in my Cours. For 
instance, it has seemed to me to be convenient to adopt Profes- 
sor Walras' definition of capital ; I have not, however, deduced 
any conclusions from it. If anyone should prefer a differ- 
ent definition, there would be no objection to his using it, and 
he would obtain the same results as I have if he reasoned 
exclusively about things and not about words alone. I should 
even venture so far as to say that I could rewrite the whole of 
my Cours, and obtain the same results, without even mentioning 
the term " capital," if it were worth the while to attempt the 
feat. In fact, the base of calculations as regards production 
is the budget of the producer. Here is a person who owned a 
ship which cost him ^2000 on the first of January 1895 > lts 
value decreased to ^1800 by the first of January 1896. Dur- 
ing the year 1895 tne person in question expended ^1000 and 
received for the hire of his vessel ^4100. These facts 
must be gathered from his budget, whatever be the form in 
which it appears. The equations of production in reality only 
formulate facts of a similar character. But among the various 
forms which a balance sheet can assume, there is one which is 
particularly suitable for use in certain theoretical deductions. 
Let us suppose that we are putting down the figures of our bal- 
ance sheet and that we put the vessel down for ^2000, the 
value it had on the first of January 1895. As the ship is now 
worth only .£1800 we are obliged to charge the sum of ,£200 to 
expenses so as not to violate the form of the budget. Now, 
since we know that the vessel has the same value on the first of 
January 1895 as on tne first of January of the following year, 
we may just as well eliminate it altogether from the balance. 



498 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 

The vessel figures in our business only because it has rendered 
us a certain amount of "services" during the year 1895. 

The method of bookkeeping we used for the vessel may be 
used in the case of many other things. As it is convenient to 
designate these things by a name, let us call them " capitals." 
And let us refrain from thinking that in giving them a name we 
change their nature, and let us at all events not waste our time 
in discussing the name to be given them. If anyone prefers a 
different name from the one we have selected, he is free to 
adopt it. If it should be found convenient to state the 
budget in some other form than that adopted, we need not 
hesitate to do so, as the results will doubtless be the same. The 
very same thing can be considered as capital or not as capital, 
according to our way of looking at it when we draw up the bal- 
ance sheet of production. To be capital is not to possess an 
objective quality analogous to specific weight, chemical consti- 
tution, etc.; it is a characteristic which depends upon the way 
we use a thing in the process of production. 

Another perfectly valueless discussion is the one on the 
question as to whether it is preferable to use the term " factors 
of production" or the term "coefficients of industry." Let us 
suppose that four hectares are needed to produce eighty hectoli- 
tres of corn. These four hectares are called "factors of produc- 
tion " of the corn. Professor Walras takes as a premise in his 
discussion the quantity of ground needed to give a unit of prod- 
uce. In the case assumed four-eightieths or one-twentieth of 
a hectare is required to raise one hectolitre of corn. Professor 
Walras gives to this one-twentieth of a hectare the name "coeffi- 
cient of industry." Now, does it not amount to the same thing 
to say that four hectares of ground yield eighty hectolitres of 
corn, or that the one-twentieth part of a hectare yields one 
hectolitre of corn? One must be overfond of disputing about 
words, to let oneself drift into endless discussions as to the best 
term for presenting any given fact. We might mention a great 
many other discussions of the same character — all similarly 
wanting in simple common sense. But I prefer to drop this 



THE NEW THEORIES OF ECONOMICS 499 

subject and to pass on to the consideration of more serious 
questions. 

The presentation of the economic phenomenon in its entirety 
affords a clear comprehension of the effects of all conceivable 
economic organizations concerned ;, but it must be borne in mind 
that this knowledge will always remain approximate only. Science 
does not attempt to establish any particular method of economic 
organization, and it is not the business of science to do so. 
Science does, however, attempt to solve problems of the follow- 
ing kind: (i) What are the effects of a regime of free compe- 
tition? (2) What are those of a regime of monopoly? (3) 
Those of a collectivist regime ? All these questions must, of 
course, be treated, not from a polemical point of view, but solely 
for the purpose of ascertaining what results would follow upon 
their installation. It is especially necessary for us to discover 
what relation these results bear to the aggregate well being of 
humanity ; and to do this not only a first approximation, but a 
second and a third, and perhaps even more, must be made, because 
the later approximations take account of secondary facts which 
are easily neglected in the earlier ones. The regimes compared 
may appear to yield identical results if only a first approxima- 
tion be undertaken, and may differ materially in their results 
when reconsidered for the purpose of a second approximation. 

By following this line we have been able vigorously to prove 
that the coefficients of production are determined by the entre- 
preneurs in a regime of free competition precisely in the same 
way as a socialist government would have to fix them if it 
wanted to realize a maximum of ophelimity for its subjects. 
This proposition is one of the main points of the so-called clas- 
sical political economy ; but it was necessary to give this prop- 
osition precision, in order to see clearly the limits within which 
it holds true and what conditions it assumes as given. This 
was also necessary in order to obtain a general proposition 
showing that every indirect transfer of wealth from one individ- 
ual to another is accompanied by a loss of wealth. As a result 
of this it appears that if a socialist government is to obtain a max- 



500 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 

imum of well being for its subjects it must modify the distribu- 
tion of wealth only in a direct way — say by taxing some people 
for the benefit of others, or by some similar means. A second 
approximation will take account of the expense of putting the 
mechanism of free competition into full play, and will compare 
this expense with that necessary for establishing some other new 
mechanism which society may wish to test. This is the way 
in which an engineer would first compare two systems of 
machinery from a theoretic point of view, keeping to the prin- 
ciples of. thermodynamics for steam engines ; then he would 
make tests of friction, loss of steam power, etc., in each system. 

This method of approaching the subject differs substan- 
tially from that adopted by a large class of economists, who, 
after giving in their adhesion to a system, put forth all their 
power in showing its advantages and in defending it against all 
attacks to which it may be exposed. I once more repeat that I 
am far from condemning such economists, for I regard their 
work as one of great utility. This being the situation, I have 
no desire to offer a substitute for their work, but simply to add 
to it a purely scientific study. All the conclusions to which 
deductive studies founded on the general equations of the eco- 
nomic equilibrium can lead us must finally be verified by a care- 
ful scrutiny of facts, both present and past — that is to say, by 
statistics, by close observation, and by the evidence of history. 
This is the method of all the material sciences. Deductive studies 
in political economy must not be opposed to the inductive ; these 
two lines of work should, on the contrary, supplement each 
other, and neither should be neglected. 

The incidence of duties is a special case of such alterations 
as the economic equilibrium undergoes when certain of its con- 
ditions are modified. The new theories give us an exact idea of 
the nature of the incidence of duties. In order to ascertain this 
with exactness we must have at hand the numerical data bearing 
on this incidence ; but statistics have not as yet supplied them. 
This delays the practical application. A great advance toward 
the solution of the problem has been made, however, when the 



THE NEW THEORIES OF ECONOMICS 501 

method has been found by which the problem is to be solved. 
So, for instance, if we wish to know the area of a rectangle two 
things are required — (1) the knowledge that the area is to be 
obtained by multiplying the width by the length and (2) the 
exact measurements of the width and the length. Geometry 
gives us only the former item. 

The laws of the distribution of wealth evidently depend on 
the nature of man and on the economic organization of society. 
We might derive these laws by deductive reasoning, taking as a 
starting point the data of the nature of man and of the economic 
organization of society. Will this work sometime be com- 
pleted ? I cannot say ; but at present it is certain that we lack 
sufficient data for undertaking it. At present the phenomena 
must be considered synthetically, and every endeavor must be 
made to discover if the distribution of wealth presents any uni- 
formity at all. Fortunately the figures representing the distri- 
bution of wealth group themselves according to a very simple 
law, which I have been enabled to deduce from unquestioned 
statistical data. 1 This law being empirical, it may not always 
remain true, especially not for all mankind. At present, how- 
ever, the statistics which we have present no exceptions to the 
law ; it may therefore provisionally be accepted as universal. But 
exceptions may be found, and I should not be greatly surprised 
if some day a well-authenticated exception were discovered. 

Meanwhile, this law as it stands has most important theoret- 
ical results, and these resulting formula? may be employed with- 
out limitations of time and place, provided the law be verified 
by statistics. 

1 This law is as follows : N= -. — , — r^— . In which yV represents the number of 

(x -\- b)a 

individuals having an income greater than x or A; b is a constant which for aggregate 
incomes is in general zero, or very near it ; a is another constant whose value lies 
between 1 and 2. The law applies only to incomes a little above the minimum. The 
form of the curve in the immediate neighborhood of this minimum income is still 
undetermined, for statistics do not furnish us sufficient information for its determina- 
tion. Since the publication of my Cours I have examined many new statistical data, 
and they all verify the law which I had there formulated. The results of my later 
investigations have been published in the Giornale degli Economisti (Rome). 



502 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 

Mathematics is employed in connection with this law, but in 
a totally different way from that in which has been utilized in the 
analytical studies considered at the outset. In those studies the 
complexity of the phenomena compelled us to make use of 
mathematics ; in the case we have just been considering they 
present us under the forms of a simple curve the entire sum of 
results supplied by statistics. But in the one case, as in the 
other, those who are not well at home in the use of mathematics 
can nevertheless master the results gained through their use. 
In my Cours it has been possible to throw the mathematical 
parts into footnotes, and the text can thus be read without hin- 
drance by persons who have no knowledge of mathematics. 

This law of the distribution of wealth, which has so lately 
been discovered, may some day be of use in the study of the 
different races of men in this respect. 1 The application of the 
law is certainly conditioned by the heterogeneity of the popula- 
tion. It does not in any way prejudice other theories of the 
distribution of wealth, for the law is merely the synthesis of 
numberless statistical facts. It can be compared in some 
respects to Kepler's law in astronomy ; we still lack a theory 
that may make this law of distribution rational in the way in 
which the theory of universal gravitation has made Kepler's law 
rational. 

VlLFREDO PARETO. 

University of Lausanne. 

1 Mr. Carlos C. Closson has made an important contribution to this line of study 
in this Journal for September 1896. 



