LITTLE BLUE BOOK NO. 
Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius 



200 



The Ignorant 
Philosopher 



VOLTAIRE 



A 



LITTLE BLUE BOOK NO. 
Edited by B. Haldeman-Julius 



200 



The Ignorant 

Philosopher 



VOLTAIRE 



HALDEMAN-JULIUS COMPANY 
GIRARD, KANSAS 



PliiNTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

I. THE FIRST DOUBT. 

Who art thou? From whence dost thou 
come? What is thy employment? What will 
become of thee? These are questions that 
should be put to every being in the universe, 
but to which no one replies. I ask of plants 
by what virtue they grow, and how the same 
earth produces such a diversity of fruits? 
These insensible and mute beings, though en- 
riched with a divine faculty, leave me to my 
own ignorance and to vain conjectures. 

I interrogate that herd of different animals, 
all which have the power of motion and com- 
munication, who enjoy the same sensations as 
myself, whose passions are accompanied with 
an extent of ideas and memory. They are still 
more ignorant than myself what they are, 
wherefore they exist, and what they shall 
become. 

I suspect, I have even some reason to Delieve 
that the planets, the innumerable suns which 
replenish space, are peopled with sensible and 
thinking people; but an eternal barrier separ- 
ates us, and no inhabitant of the other globes 
ever communed with us. 

The Prior, in Nature Displayed, says to the 
Knight, that the stars were made for the 
earth, and the earth as well «as animals for 
man. But as the little globe of earth revolves 
with the other planets round the sun; as the 



4 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

regular and proportionate motions of the stars 
may eternally subsist without men; as there 
are in our little planet an infinitely greater 
number of animals than human beings; I im- 
agine that the Prior was actuated by too 
great a share of self-love, in flattering him- 
self that every thing had been made for him. 
I find that man in his life-time will be de- 
voured by every kind of animal, if he be de- 
fenceless, and that they all devour him after 
his death. Wherefore I have had some diffi- 
culty in conceiving that the Prior and the 
Knight were the sovereigns of nature. A 
slave to every thing that surrounds me, in- 
stead of being a king; chained to a single 
Eoint, and environed with immensity; I will 
egin by searching into myself. 

IL OUE WEAKNESS 

I am a weak animal; at my birth I have 
neither strength, knowledge, nor instinct; I 
cannot even crawl to my mother's breast, like 
every quadruped; I only acquire a few ideas, 
as I acquire a little strength, and as my or- 
gans begin to unfold themselves. This strength 
increases in me, till such time as having at- 
tained my full growth it daily decreases. 
This power of conceiving ideas increases in 
the same manner during its term, and after- 
wards by degrees insensibly vanishes. 

What is that mechanism which momentarily 
increases the strength of my members, as far 
as the prescribed boundaries? I am Ignorant 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER B 

of it; and those who have passed their whole 
lives in the research, know no more than my- 
self. 

What is that other power, which conveys 
images into my brain, and which preserves 
them in my memory? Those who ari paid for 
knowing have only made fruitless enquiries; 
we are all in the same state of ignorance, 
with regard to the first principles of our in- 
fant state. 

III. HOW AM I TO THINK. 

Have the books which have been written 
for these two thousand years taught me any- 
thing ? We have sometimes a desire of know- 
ing in what manner we think, though we have 
seldom any desire of knowing how we digest, 
how we walk. I have questioned my reason, 
and asked what it is? This question has al- 
wavs confounded me. 

I have endeavored to discover by it, if the 
same springs that make me digest, which 
make me walk, are the same whereby I re- 
ceive ideas. I never could conceive how and 
wherefore these ideas fled when my body 
languished with hunger, and how they were 
renovated after I had eaten. 

I discovered such a wide difference netween 
thought and nourishment, without which I 
should not think, that I believed there was a 
substance in me that reasoned., and another 
substance that digested. Nevertheless, by 
constantly endeavoring to convince myself 



6 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

that we are two, I materially felt that I was 
only one; and this contradiction gave me 
infinite pain. 

I have asked some of my own likenesses 
who cultivate the earth, our common mother, 
with great industry, if they felt that they 
were two? if they had discovered by their 
philosophy, that they possessed within them 
an immortal substance, and nevertheless form- 
ed of nothing, existing without extent, acting 
upon their nerves, without touching them, 
sent expressly into them six weeks after their 
conception? They thought that I was jesting, 
and pursued the cultivation of their land with- 
out making me a reply. 



IV. IS IT NECESSARY FOR ME TO KNOW? 

Finding then that a prodigious number of 
men had not even the slightest idea of the 
difficulties that disturbed me, and had no 
doubts of what is taught in schools, of being 
in general, matter and spirit, etc., finding that 
they often ridiculed my desire of being ac- 
quainted with these things; I suspected that 
it was not in the least necessary that we 
should know them; I imagined that nature has 
given to every being a portion that is proper 
for him; and I thought those things which we 
could not attain, did not belong to us. But 
notwithstanding this despair, I cannot divest 
myself of a desire of being instructed; and 
my baffled curiosity is ever insatiable* 



THE IINORANT PHILOSOPHER 7 

V. ARISTOTLE, DESCARTES AND 
GASSENDI. 

Aristotle begins by saying, that incredulity 
is the source of wisdom; Descartes has car- 
ried this sentiment still farther, and they have 
both taught me to believe nothing they say. 
This Descartes, particularly, after pretending 
to doubt, speaks in such an affirmative man- 
ner of what he does not understand; he is sure 
of the fact, when he is grossly mistaken in 
physics; he has built such an Imaginary 
world; his whirlwinds and three elements are 
so prodigiously ridiculous, that I ought to 
suspect everything he says upon the soul, after 
he has imposed upon me with respect to bodies. 

He believes, or affects to believe, that we 
are born with metaphysical ideas. I would as 
soon aver that Homer was born with the Iliad 
in his head. It is very true, that Homer, 
at his birth, had a brain so constructed, that 
having afterwards acquired poetical ideas, 
sometimes fine, sometimes incoherent, or some- 
times exaggerated, he at length composed the 
Iliad. We bring into the world at our birth 
the seed of what afterwards displays itself in 
us; but we have really no more innate ideas 
than Raphael and Michael Angelo had at their 
birth pencils and colors. 

Descartes endeavors to unite his scattered 
chimeras, by supposing men always to think; 
I would as soon imagine that birds never 
cease flying, or dogs running, because they 
are endowed with these abilities. 



8 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

We need only consult a little of our experi- 
ence and that of human nature, to be thor- 
oughly convinced of the contrary; tnere is no 
man mad enought to firmly believe he has 
thought all his life, night and day, without in- 
terruption, from the time of his being a foetus 
till his last illness. The only resource of 
those who have defended such a romance has 
been to say that we always think, Dut we do 
not always perceive that we think. It 
might be as well asserted, that we drink, eat, 
and ride on horseback without knowing it. If 
you don't perceive that you possess any ideas, 
how can you affirm that you have any? Gas- 
sendi ridiculed this extravagant system as it 
deserved. Do you know what was the conse- 
quence? Gassendi and Descartes were pro- 
nounced atheists. 



VI. BEASTS. 

Man being supposed to have continually pos- 
sessed ideas, perceptions, and conceptions, it 
naturally follows, that beasts were likewise 
always in possession of them; for It is incon- 
testable that a hunting dog has the idea of 
the master he obeys, and of the game that he 
brings him. It is evident that he has memory, 
and that he combines some ideas. Thus then 
if the thought of man be the essence of his 
soul, that of the dog is the essence of his 
soul, and if man had always ideas, animals 
must necessarily have had them also. To 
remove this difficulty, the manufacturer 01 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 9 

whirlwinds and chamfered matter dared to 
say, that beasts were pure machines, who 
sought for food without appetite, who had 
constantly had the organs of sensation with- 
out ever having the least sensation, who cried 
without pain, who testified joy without pleas- 
ure, who possessed a brain incapable of receiv- 
ing: the slightest idea, and who were therefore 
a perpetual contradiction. 

This system was as ridiculous as the other; 
but instead of exposing extravagance, it was 
treated as impious. It was pretended that 
this system was repugnant to the Holy Scrip- 
tures, which says in Genesis, "And surety 
your blood of your lives will I require; at the 
hand of every beast will I require it;" which 
manifestly supposes in beasts a knowledge of, 
and acquaintance with, good and evil 



VII. EXPERIENCE. 

Let us never introduce the Holy Scriptures 
into our philosophical disputes; these are 
things too heterogeneous, and which have no 
relation to it. The point here is to examine 
what we can know by ourselves, and this is 
reduced to a very narrow compass. We must 
give up all pretensions to common sense not 
to agree, that we know nothing in the world 
but by experience, and by a succession of grop- 
ing and long reflection, that we obtain some 
feeble and sligLt ideas of body, of space, time, 
infinity, and God himself; it would not be 
worth while for the author of nature to put 



10 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

these ideas into the brain of every foetus, in 
order that only a very small number of men 
should make use of them 

We are all, with respect to the objects of 
our knowledge, like the ignorant lovers Da- 
phnis and Chloe, whose amours and innocence 
Longus has depicted. They required much time 
to learn how to satisfy their desires, they hav- 
ing no experience. The same thing happened 
to the emperor Leopold, and to a son of Louis 
XIV.; it was necessary to instruct them. If 
they had been born with innate ideas, we 
should believe that nature would not have re- 
fused them the knowledge necessary for the 
preservation of the human species. 



VIII. SUBSTANCE. 

As we can I*ave no notion, but by experience, 
it is not impossible that w T e can ever know 
what matter is. We touch, we see the proper- 
ties of this substance; but this very expres- 
sion "substance which is beneath," sufficient- 
ly acquaints us that this thing beneath will 
ever be unknown to us; whatever we may dis- 
cover of its appearance, there will always re- 
main this beneath to discover. For the same 
reason, we can never know by ourselves what 
is spirit. It is a word which usually signifies 
breath, and by which we endeavor to express 
vaguely and grossly that which gives U9 
thoughts. But when, even by a prodigy, which 
is not to be supposed, we should acquire some 
slight idea of the substance of this spirit, we 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHBB II 

should be no farther advanced; and we could 
never guess how this substance received senti- 
ments and thoughts. We know very well that 
we have some small intellectual faculty; but 
how do we obtain it? This is a secret of na- 
ture, which she has not divulged to any mor- 
tal. 

IX. NARROW LIMITS. 

. Our intellects are confined as well as the 
strength of our body. Some men are more 
robust than others; there are also Hercules' 
with respect to thought; but, at the bottom, 
tnis superiority is a very trivil thing. One 
shall lift ten times as much matter as myself; 
another can do in his head and without paper, 
a division of fifteen figures, whilst I can only 
divide three or four, with much difficulty; 
here then is the extent of that vaunted 
strength; its limits are very confined; and 
therefore in games of combination, no man 
after having trained himself with great ap- 
plication and long practice, will, with all his 
efforts, get beyond that degree of perfection 
allotted him: this is the goal of his intellect. 
It is absolutely necessary that it should be so, 
otherwise we should gradually go on to in- 
finity. 

X. IMPOSSIBLE DISCOVERIES. 

In this narrow circle by which we are cir- 
cumscribed, let us see what we are condemned 



12 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

to be ignorant of, and what we gain a little 
knowledge of. We have already found, that 
no first resource, no first principle, can be 
traced by us. 

Why does my arm obey my will? We are 
so accustomed to this incomprehensible phen- 
omenon, that very few pay attention to it; and 
when we want to trace the cause of so com- 
mon an effect, we find that there is infinity 
between our will and the obedience of our 
limb; that is to say, there is no proportion be- 
tween them, no reason, no apparent cause; 
and we feel that we might think of eternity, 
without being able to discover the least 
glimpse of probability. 

XL THE FOUNDATION OF DESPAIR. 

Thus stopped at the very first onset, and 
vainly relying upon ourselves, we are dismay- 
ed from seeking after ourselves, as we can 
never discover ourselves. To ourselves we are 
inexplicable, 

We know pretty nearly, with the assistance 
of triangles, that the sun and earth are about 
thirty millions of geometrical miles distant; 
but what is the sun? and wherefore does it 
turn upon its axis? and why in one sense 
more than another? and why do Saturn and 
we revolve round this planet sooner rrom west 
to east than from east to west? This ques- 
tion will not only ever remain unsatisfied, but 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 18 

we shall never discover the least possibility 
to devise a physical cause of it. Wherefore? 
because the first knot of this difficulty is in 
the principle of things. 

It is the same with respect to what acts 
within us, as to what actuates the immense 
spaces of nature. There is in the arrangement 
of the planets, and in the formation of a hand- 
worm, and of man, a first principle, the ave- 
nue to which must necessarily be barred 
against us. For if we could be acquainted 
with the cause of our first origin, we should 
be its masters, we should be gods. Let us il- 
lustrate this idea, and see if it be just. 

Suppose that we found, in effect, the cause 
of our sensations, of our thoughts, and our 
motions, as we have only discovered in the 
planets the reason of eclipses and of the dif- 
ferent phases of the moon and Venus; it is 
evident we could then foretell our sensations, 
our thoughts, and our desires resulting from 
these sensations, as we predict the phases and 
the eclipses. Being then acquainted with what 
would happen to-morrow within us. we should 
clearly see by the play of this machine, wheth- 
er we should be affected in a fatal or auspici- 
ous manner. We havej it is agreed, a will that 
directs our interior motions in various circum- 
stances. For example, I find myself disposed 
to wrath, my reflection and will suppress its 
growing exhibition; I shall see if I know my 
first principles, all the affections to which I 
am disposed for tomorrow, all the successive 
ideas that wait for me; I could have the same 



14 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

power over this succession of ideas and senti- 
ments, as I sometimes exert over actual senti- 
ments and thoughts, which I divert and re- 
press. I should find myself precisely in the 
same case with every man who can retard 
and accelerate, according to his will, the mo- 
tion of a watch, a ship, or any other well- 
known machine. 

Being master of the ideas that are destined 
for me tomorrow, I should be also of those for 
the following day, and even the remainder of 
my life; I could then be ever powerful over 
myself. I should be the God of myself. I 
am very sensible that this state is incompati- 
ble with my nature; it is therefore impossible 
that I can know anything of the first princi- 
ple which makes me think and act. 

XII. DOUBT. 

Is that which is impossible for my weak 
limited nature of so short a duration, equally 
impossible in other globes, in other species of 
beings? Are there any superior intelligences, 
masters of all their ideas, who think and feel 
all that they choose? I know nothing of the 
matter; I am only acquainted with my own 
weakness, I have no idea of the powers of 
others. 

XIII. AM I FREE. 

Let us not yet quit the circle of our exist- 
ence; let us examine ourselves as far as we 






THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 15 

are able. I remember one day before I had 
put all the foregoing questions, a reasoner 
wanted to make me reason. He asked me if, 
I was free ? I replied that I was not in prison, 
that I had the key of my chamber, that I was 
perfectly free. That is not what I ask you, he 
replied, do you believe your will is at liberty 
of disposing or not disposing you to throw 
yourself out of the window? Do you think 
with the scholastic angel that the free agent 
is an appetitive power, and the free agent is 
lost by sin ? I fixed my eyes upon the querist, 
in order to read in his, if he was not out of 
his mind; and I answered, that I did not under- 
stand the least of his gibberish. 

Nevertheless, this question, upon the free- 
dom of man, greatly interested me; I read 
scholastics, and, like them, I was in the dark; 
I read Locke, and I discovered some rays of 
light; I read Collin's treatise, which appeared 
to me an improvement upon Locke; and I have 
never read anything since that has given me 
additional instruction. This is what my weak 
reason hath conceived, with the assistance of 
these two great men, the only two, who have, 
in my opinion, understood themselves in writ- 
ing upon this subject, and the only two who 
have made themselves understood to others. 

There is nothing without a cause. An ef- 
fect without a cause, are words without mean- 
ing 1 . Every time that I have a will, this can 
only be in consequence of my judgment, good 
or bad ; this judgment is necessary, consequent- 
ly, so is my will. In effect, it would be very 



Id THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

singular that all nature, all the planets, should 
oDey eternal laws, and that there should be 
a little animal five feet high, who, in contempt 
of these laws, could act as he pleased, solely 
according to his caprice. He would act by 
chance; and we know that chance is nothing. 
We have invented this word to express the 
known effect of all unknown causes. 

My ideas necessarily enter into my brain. 
how then can my will, which depends upon 
them, be free? I feel upon various occasions, 
that this will is not free; thus wnen I am 
overwhelmed with illness, when I am trans- 
ported with passion, when my judgment can- 
not comprehend objects that present them- 
selves to me, etc. I should think, therefore, 
that the laws of nature being always the 
same, my will is not more free in things that 
appear to me the most indifferent, than in 
those in which I find myself compelled by an 
invincible force. 

To be really free is to have power. My 
liberty consists in doing what I choose: but 
I must necessarily choose what I will; other- 
wise it would be without reason, without cause, 
which is impossible. My liberty consists in 
walking when I .have a mind to walk, and I 
have not the gout. 

My liberty consists in not doing a bad 
action when my mind necessarily represents 
it as a bad action; to subdue a passion, when 
my mind points out to me the danger of It, 
and the horror of the act powerfully combats 
my desire. We may suppress our passions 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 17 

(as I have already said, No. IV.) but then we 
are not freer in suppressing our desires, than 
by letting ourselves be carried away by our 
inclination; for in both cases, we irresistibly 
pursue our last idea; and this last is neces- 
sary: wherefore I necessarily perform what 
this dictates to me. It is strange that men 
should not be content with this measure of 
liberty, that is to say, the power which they 
have received from nature of doing what they 
choose; the planets have it not; we possess 
it, and our pride makes us sometimes believe 
that we possess still more. We figure to our- 
selves that we have the incomprehensible 
and absurd gift of election, without reason, 
without any other motive than that of free- 
will. See No. XXIX. 

No, I cannot forgive Dr. Clarke for having 
sophistically opposed these truths, the force 
of which he felt, but which did not well agree 
with his systems. No, it is not allowed to 
such a philosopher as him to attack Collins as 
a sophist, by changing the state of the ques- 
tion, and reproaching Collins with calling man 
"a necessary agent." Agent or patient, what 
doth it signify? An agent when he voluntari- 
ly moves, a patient when he receives ideas. 
What doth the name to the thing? Man is 
in everything a dependent being, as nature is 
throughout dependent, and he cannot be ex- 
cepted from other beings. 

The preacher in Samuel Clarke stifles tke 
philosopher; he distinguishes the physical 
from the moral necessity. And what is a 



18 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

moral necessity? It appears probable to you 
that a queen of England, whose coronation 
ceremony is performed in a church, will not 
cast off her regal robes to throw herself quite 
naked upon the altar, though a similar adven- 
ture is related of a queen of Congo. You 
call this a moral necessity in a queen of our 
climate; but it is at the bottom, a physical 
and eternal necessity, blended with the con- 
stitution of things. It is as certain this 
queen will not be guilty of such a folly, as that 
she will one day die. Moral necessity is but 
a phase: all that is done is absolutely neces- ■ 
sary. There is no medium between necessity 
and chance; and you know there is no chance: 
wherefore all that happens is necessary? 

To embarrass the thing still more, it has 
been devised to distinguish again between ne- 
cessity and constraint; but constraint, in fact, 
is nothing but necessity that is perceived, and 
necessity is a constraint, that is unperceived. 
Archimedes is equally necessitated to remain 
in his chamber when shut in, as when he is 
deeply engaged with a problem, and the idea 
of going out does not occur to him. 

Ducunt volentem fata, nolentum trahunt. 

The ignoramus who thinks in this manner, 
did not always think the same; but he is at 
length compelled to yield. 

XVI IS EVERY THING ETERNAL? 

Subject to eternal laws like every sphere that 
replenishes space, as the elements, animals, 



THE IGNORANT THILOSOPHKR 19 

and plants, I view with astonishment every 
thing that surrounds me; I search for my 
author, and the author of that immense ma- 
chine, of which I am scarce a perceptible 
wheel. 

I am not derived from nothing; for the sub- 
stance of my father and mother, who bore 
me nine months in her womb, is something. 
It is evident to me that the sperm whicn pro- 
duced me, could not be produced from nothing; 
for how can nothing produce existence? 1 
find myself subdued by this maxim of all an- 
tiquity, "nothing arises from naught, nothing 
can return to naught." 

This axiom carries with it such dreadful 
power, that it bears down all my understand- 
ing, without my being able to contend with it 
No philosopher has ever lost sight of it. No 
legislator whatsoever has contested it. The 
Cahut of the Phoenicians, the Chaos of the 
Greeks, the Tohu-bohu of the Chaldeans and 
the Hebrews, all evince that the eternity of 
matter has ever been believed. My reason, 
perhaps, deceived by so ancient and general 
an idea, tells me — matter must necessarily be 
eternal, because it exists: if it was in being 
yesterday, it was Before. 

I cannot perceive any probability of its 
having begun to be, any cause why it had not 
been, any cause wherefore it received exist- 
ence at one time more than at another. I 
therefore yield to this conviction, whether well 
or ill founded, and I list myself under the 
banner of the whole world, till such time as 



20 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

having some progress in my. researches, I 
discover a luminary superior to the judgment 
of all mankind, which compels me to retract 
against my will. 

But if, according to the opinion of so many 
philosophers of antiquity, the eternal being 
has always acted, what becomes of the Cahut 
and Erebus of the Phoenicians, the Tohu-bohu 
of the Chaldeans, the Chaos of Hesiod? they 
will remain fables. Chaos is an impossibility 
in the eyes of reason; for it is impossible that 
intelligence being eternal, there should ever 
have been anything contrary to the laws of 
that intelligence: now the Chaos is precisely 
contrary to all the laws of nature. Enter into 
the most horrid caverns of the Alps, under 
those ruins of rocks, ice, sand, waters, un- 
fashioned crystals, and minerals, they all sub- 
mit to gravitation. Chaos never existed any- 
where but in our heads, and has only served to 
assist Hesiod and Ovid in the composing of 
some elegant verses. 

If our Holy Scripture says Chaos did exist, 
if it had adopted the Tohu-bohu, we doubtless 
believe it, and with the most ready faith. We 
are, in this place, speaking only of the deceit- 
ful lights of our reason. We have confined 
ourselves, as we have said, to what we may 
suspect by ourselves. We are children, who 
endeavor to go a few steps without leading- 
strings. 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER U 

XV. INTELLIGENCE 

But in perceiving the order, prodigious skill, 
mechanical and geometrical laws, that reign 
in the universe, their cause, the innumerable 
ends of all things, I am seized with admiration 
and respect. I immediately judge, that if the 
works of man, even my own, compel me to ac- 
knowledge an intelligence within us, I should 
acknowledge one far more superior, actuating 
the multitude of so many works. I admit 
of this supreme intelligence, without fearing 
that I shall be obliged to change my opinion. 
Nothing staggers me with respect to this ax- 
iom, every work demonstrates a workman. 

XVI. ETERNITY 

Is this intelligence eternal? Doubtless, for 
whether I admit or reject the eternity of mat- 
ter, I cannot reject the eternal existence of 
its supreme artizan; and it is evident that if 
it exists at present, it ever has existed. 

XVII. INCOMPREHENSIBILITY 

I have as yet advanced only two or three 
steps in this vast career; I want to know if 
this divine intelligence is something absolutely 
distinct from the universe, nearly as the 
sculptor is distinguished from the statue; or 
whether this soul of the world is united to 
the world, and still penetrates it nearly in 
the same manner, as what I call my soul is 



22 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

united to me, and according to that of anti- 
quity so well expressed in Virgil and Lucan: 

Mens agitat molem and magno se corpore 
miscet, 

Jupiter est quodcumque vides quocomque 
moveris. 

I find myself suddenly interrupted in the 
prospect of my vain curiosity. Miserable mor- 
tal, if I cannot fathom my own intelligence 
if I cannot know by what I am animated, how 
can I have any acquaintance with the inef- 
fable intelligence which visibly presides over 
matter entirely? There is one, as everything 
demonstrates, but where is the compass that 
will direct me towards its secret and eternal 
abode ? 



XVIII. INFINITY. 

Is this intelligence infinite in power and 
immensity, as it is incontestably infinite in 
duration?' I can know nothing of this by 
myself. It doth exist wherefore it hath otw 
existed, that is clear. But what idea can 1 
have of an infinite power? How can I con- 
ceive an infinity actually existing? How can 
I suppose that the supreme intelligence is in 
the vacuum ? An infinity of extent is not 
the same as an infinity of duration. 
An infinity of duration is elapsed, 
the instant that I am speaking of it; it is 
certain, that I can add nothing to past dura- 
tion, but I can always add to that space which 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 23 

I conceive, in the same manner that I can 
add to the numbers that I conceive. Infinity 
in numbers and extent is beyond the sphere 
of my understanding. All that can be said 
can give me no insight into this abyss. I hap- 
pily feel that my difficulties and my ignorance 
can be no way pernicious to morality; we may 
very well be incapable of perceiving neither 
immensity of space replenished, nor infinite 
power which has created every thing, and 
which may nevertheless be still able to per- 
form; this will only serve to prove still more 
the weakness of our understanding; and this 
weakness will render us only more submissive 
to t v ^ eternal Being, whose work we are. 

XIX. MY DEPENDENCE. 

We are his work. This is an important 
truth for us to know; for to know philosophi- 
cally at what time he made man, what he did 
before, if he exists materially, or m vacuum, 
if he is at one point, if he constantly acts or 
not, if he acts everywhere, if he acts without 
or within himself; these are researches which 
strengthen the conviction of my profound ig- 
norance. 

I even see that there has been scarce a 
dozen men in Europe who have written upon 
these abstracted things with any kind of 
method; and if I could suppose that they had 
spoken in an intelligible manner, what would 
be the consequence? We have already found 
(No. IV.) that things which so few persons 



24 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

can flatter themselves with understanding, 
are useless to the rest of mankind. We cer- 
tainly are the work of God, this is useful for 
me to know; and the proof is also clear. All 
things in my body are causes and effects; that 
is, spring, pulley, moving power, hydraulic 
machine, equilibrium of fluids, and chemical 
laboratory. It is therefore arranged by an 
intelligence, (No. XV.) I am not indebted for 
this arrangement to the intelligence of my 
parents, for they certainly did not know what 
they did when they produced me: they were 
only the blind instruments of this eternal 
manufacturer, who animates the worm of the 
earth, and makes the sun turn upon its own 
axis. 



XX. ETERNITY AGAIN. 

Born from seed, produced by other seed, has 
there been a continual succession, an unfolding 
without end of these seeds, and has all nature 
ever existed by a necessary succession from 
that Supreme Being, who existed of himself? 
If I were to believe only my feeble under- 
standing, I should say, it seems to me, that 
nature has always been animated. I cannot 
conceive that the cause which continually and 
visibly actuates her, being at all times able to 
act, has not always acted. An eternity of 
idleness in the active and necessary being, 
appears to me incompatible. I am inclined 
to believe, that the world has ever issued 
from that primitive and necessary cause, as 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHEE 25 

light emanates from the sun. By what a 
concatenation of ideas do I find myself led to 
believe the works of the eternal being eternal ? 
My conception pusillanimous as it is, has 
strength enough to rise to a being necessarily 
existing by himself; but has not the strength 
to conceive nought. The existence of a single 
atom proves to me the eternity of existence, 
but nothing proves to me a mere void. What? 
is that space filled that was once a vacuum? 
This appears absurd and contradictory. I can- 
not allow of this nothing, this void, unless 
revelation assists me in fixing my ideas, which 
carry me beyond time . 

I am sensible that an infinite succession of 
beings without origin, is equally absurd: this 
is the opinion of Samuel Clarke: but he does 
not undertake to affirm that God has not held 
this chain from all eternity; he dare not 
say that it was impossible for a Being eter- 
nally active, so long to display his worKs. It 
is evident that he could, and if he could, who 
will be bold enough to tell me that he did not? 
I say, once more, that nothing but revelation 
can teach me the contrary. But we have not 
yet attained that revelation which destroys 
all philosophy, that light before which all 
other lights are eclipsed. 

XXI. MY DEPENDENCE AGAIN. 

This eternal being, this universal cause, 
gives me my ideas; for I don't receive them 
from objects. Jnshaped matter cannot com- 



26 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

municate any thoughts to me; my thoughts 
do not come from myself, for they occur 
against my will, and frequently escape the 
same. We know very well there is no resem- 
blance, no connection between objects, our 
ideas, and sensations. There was certainly 
something sublime in that Mallebranche, who 
dared to imagine that we see everything in 
God himself. But was there not something 
sublime in the Stoics, who thought that God 
acted within us, and that we possess a ray of 
his substance? Where shall we find truth be- 
tween the dreams of Mallebranche and the 
Stoics? I sink again (No. II.) into ignorance, 
which is the appendage of our nature, and I 
adore that God by whom I think, without 
knowing how I think. 

XXII. A FRESH DOUBT. 

Convinced by my small share of reason, that 
there is a necessary eternal Being, from whom 
I receive my ideas, without being able to di- 
vine how or wherefore, I ask what is this 
being ? If it hath the form of tnose intelligent 
and active species superior to ours in other 
globes? I have already said I knew nothing 
of the matter (No. I.) Nevertheless, I cannot 
affirm it to be impossible; for I perceive plan- 
ets very superior to ours in extent, surrounded 
with more satellites than the earth. It is not 
improbable that they may be peopled with 
intelligences far superior to me, with bodies 
more robust, more active and more durable. 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 27 

But their existence having no connection with 
mine, I shall leave it to the poets of antiquity, 
to make Venus descend from her imaginary 
third heaven, avA Mars from the -fifth. My 
enquiries should be confined to the action of 
the Being necessarily presiding over myself. 

XXIII. A SOLE SUPREME ARTIST. 

A geat part of mankind observing the physi- 
cal and moral evil diffused through this globe, 
imagined there were two powerful beings, one 
of which produced all the good, and the other 
all the evil. If they existed they were neces- 
sary; they therefore necessarily existed in the 
same place; there is no reason that what ex- 
ists by its own nature should be excluded any 
place; they therefore penetrated each other — 
this is absurd. The idea of these two powerful 
enemies can derive its origin only from exam- 
ples that strike us upon earth; we there ob- 
serve gentle and ferocious men, useful and 
obnoxious animals, good masters and tyrants. 
There were two opposite powers devised, who 
presided over nature; this is only an Asiatic 
romance. There is throughout nature a mani- 
fest unity of design; the laws of motion and 
gravity are invariable; it is impossible that 
two supreme artists, in opposition to each 
other, could have followed the same laws. This 
alone has, in my opinion, overturned the Mani- 
chean system, and voluminous writings are 
superfluous to explode it. 

There is then a sole eternal Power, to whom 



M THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

everything is united, on whom all depends; but 
whose nature is to me incomprehensible. St, 
Thomas tells us, "That God is a pure act, a 
form that has neither gender nor predicament, 
that he is nature and the agent, that he exists 
essentially, participatively, and noncupatively." 
When the Dominicans were masters of the in- 
quisition, they would have burnt a man who 
would have denied these fine things — I should 
not have denied them, but I should not have 
understood them. 

I am told that God is simple; I acknowledge 
that I do not understand any more the value 
of this word. It is true, that I should not at- 
tribute to him gross parts that I could sep- 
arate; but I cannot conceive that the principal 
and master of all that is in the extent, should 
not be in the extent. Simplicity, strictly speak- 
ing, appears to me to resemble too much a 
nonentity. The extreme weakness of my 
understanding has no instrument nice enough 
to lay hold of this simplicity. Shall I be told 
that the mathematical point is simple; but the 
mathematical point does not really exist. 

It is again said that an idea is simple, but 
I do not understand this a whit better. I per- 
ceive a horse, I have the idea of it, but I see 
in him only an assemblage of things. I see a 
color, I have the idea of color; but this color 
is extent. I pronounce the abstracted names 
of color in general; of vice, virtue, truth, in 
general; but the reason is, that I have had a 
knowledge of things colored, of things that 
have appeared to me virtuous or vicious, true 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 19 

or false. I express all this by a word; but I 
have no clear knowledge of simplicity. I know 
no more of it than I do of an infinity in num- 
bers actually existing. 

I am already convinced that not knowing 
what I am, I cannot know what is my author. 
I am every instant overwhelmed with my 
ignorance, and I console myself by Incessantly 
reflecting that it is of no consequence to me 
to know, whether my master is or not in the 
extent, provided I do nothing against that 
conscience he has given me. Of all the systems 
which men have invented upon the Divinity, 
which, then, shall I embrace? Not one, with- 
out it be that of adorning him. 



XXIV. SPINOZA. 

After being immersed with Thales in the 
water, of which his first principle consisted; 
after glowing before Empedocles's fire; after 
running in a straight line in the vacuum, with 
Epicurus's atoms; after having calculated 
numbers with Pythagoras, and heard his 
music; after having paid my respect to the 
Androgines of Plato, and having passed 
through all the regions of metaphysics and 
madness; I was at length desirous of being 
acquainted with the system of Spinoza. 

He is not new; he has imitated some ancieat 
Greek philosophers, and even some Jews; but 
Spinoza has done what no Greek philosopher, 
and much less a Jew, ever did. He has used 
an imposing geometrical method to calculate 



W THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHMB 

the net produce of his ideas. Let us see if 
he has not methodically wandered with the 
thread that conducts him. 

He at first establishes a clear and incon- 
testable fact. There is something, consequent- 
ly there has eternally existed a necessary Be- 
ing. This principle is so true, that the pro- 
found Samuel Clarke has availed himself of 
it, to prove the existence of God. 

This Being must be found in all places 
where there is existence; for who can limit 
it? 

This necessary being is then everything that 
exists: wherfore there is only one substance 
in the universe. 

This substance cannot create another; for 
as it fills everything, where can a new sub- 
stance be placed, and how can something be 
created from nothing? How can extent be 
created without placing it in extent itself, 
which necessarily exists? 

There are in the world thought and matter; 
that necessary substance which we call God is 
therefore thought and matter. All thought 
and all matter are then comprehended in the 
immensity of God; there can be nothing oat 
of him; they can only act within him; he com- 
prehends everything, he is everything. 

Wherefore everything we call different sub- 
stances is, in fact, nothing but the universality 
of the different attributes of the Supreme 
Being, who thinks in the brain of man, en- 
lightens in the light, moves upon the winds, 
darts in the lightning, revolves in the planets, 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER tl 

and exists in all nature. 

He is not like a vil-e king of the earth con- 
fined to his place, separated from his subjects; 
he is intimately united with them; they are 
essential parts of himself; if he were distin- 
guished from them he would be no longer uni- 
versal, he would not fill all space, he would be 
a side being like another. 

Though all the variable modifications in the 
universe are the effect of his attributes, never- 
theless, according to Spinoza, he hath no 
parts; for, says he, Infinity has none, properly 
speaking. In fine, Spinoza pronounces that 
we must love this necessary, infinite, eternal 
God. These are his words (p. 45, Edit, of 
1731.) 

"With regard to the love of God, this idea 
is so far from weakening it, that I think no 
other is so fit to increase it, since it teaches 
me that God is intimate with my being, that 
he gives me existence and all my properties, 
— that he gives them to me liberally, without 
reproach, without interest, without subjecting 
me to anything but my own nature. It ban- 
ishes fear, uneasiness, difference, and all the 
defects of a mean and sordid love. It teachea 
me that it is a good I cannot lose, and which 
I the more advantageously possess, as I know 
and love it." 

These ideas seduced many readers; there 
were even some, who having at first written 
against him, afterwards embraced his opinion. 

The learned Bayle is upbraided with having 
severely attacked Spinoza, without under- 



32 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

standing him. Severely, I agree to; but I do 
not think unjustly. He easily discovered the 
weak side of this enchanted castle: he saw 
that Spinoza, in fact, composed his God of 
parts, though he found himself compelled to 
retract, terrified at his own system. Bayla 
saw his frenzy in making God a star and a 
pumpkin, thought and smoke, beating and 
beaten. He saw that this fable is much be- 
neath that of Proteus. Perhaps Bayle should 
have conlined himself to the word modalities, 
and not parts, as Spinoza always makes use 
of the word modalities. But if I am not mis- 
taken, it is equally impertinent, whether the 
excrement of an animal is a modality or a part 
of the Supreme Being. 

He did not indeed attack the reason by 
which Spinoza maintains the impossibility of 
the creation; but the reason is, that the crea- 
tion, properly speaking, is an object of faith, . 
and not of philosophy: because this opinion is 
no way peculiar to Spinoza, and all antiquity 
have thought like him. He attacks only the 
absurd idea of a simple God, composed of 
parts, of a God that eats and digests himself, 
who loves and hates the same thing at the 
same time, etc. Spinoza constantly makes use 
of the word God, and Bayle takes him accord- 
ing to his own expressions. 

But at the bottom, Spinoza does not ac- 
knowledge any God; he has probably made use 
of this expression, he has said that we should 
serve and love God, only that he might not 
startle mankind. He appears to be an atheist, 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 83 

according to the full extent of the epithet; 
he is not such an atheist as Epicurus, who ac- 
knowledged useless and lazy gods; he is not 
like the greater part of the Greeks and Ro- 
mans, who ridiculed the gods of the vulgar; 
he is such, because he acknowledges no provi- 
dence whatever, because he admits only of 
eternity, immensity, and the necessity of 
things; like Stratonius, like Diagoras; he does 
not doubt like Pyrrha, he affirms, and what 
does he affirm? That there is only a single 
substance, that there cannot be two, that this 
substance is extended and pendant, and this is 
what none of the Greek or Asiatic philoso- 
pheres ever said, as they admitted of a uni- 
versal soul. 

He nowhere mentions in his book specified 
designs, which are manifested in all beings. 
He does not examine whether eyes were made 
to see with, ears to hear, feet to walk, or 
wings to fly; he neither considers the laws of 
motion in animals and plants, nor their struc- 
ture adapted to those laws, any more than the 
depth of mathematics, which . governs the 
course of the stars: he is afraid to perceive 
that everything which exists attests a divine 
providence; he does not rise from effects to 
their cause, but immediately placing himself 
at the head of the origin of things, he builds 
his romance in the same manner as Descartes 
constructed his, upon a supposition. He sup- 
poses, with Descartes, a plenum, though it has 
been strictly demonstrated that all motion is 
impossible in a plenum. This was his princi- 



34 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

pal reason for looking upon the universe as 
one single substance. He was the dupe to his 
geometrical genius. How came it that Spinoza, 
who could not doubt that spirit and matter ex- 
isted, did not at least examine whether pro- 
vidence had not arranged everything? How 
came it that he did not give a single glance 
towards those springs, those means, each of 
which hath its design, and enquired whether 
they evinced a supreme artist? He must 
either have been a very ignorant physician, 
or a sophist swelled up with a very stupid 
kind of pride, not to acknowledge a providence 
every time he breathed and felt his heart beat; 
for this respiration and this motion of the 
heart are the effects of a machine so indus- 
triously complicated and arranged with such 
powerful art, depending upon so many springs, 
all concurring to the same end, that is im- 
possible to be imitated, and impossible for a 
man of good sense not to admire it. 

The modern Spinozists reply, Do not terrify 
yourselves at these consequences, which you 
impute to us; we find, as you do, a succession 
of admirable effects in the organized bodies, 
and in all nature. The eternal cause is in the 
eternal intelligence, which we admit, and 
which, with matter, constitutes the universal- 
ity of things, which is God. There is but one 
single substance, which acts by the same 
modality of its thought upon the modality of 
matter, and which thus constitutes the uni- 
verse, which forms but one whole inseparable 
thing. 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER U 

To this reply we answer: How can you prove 
to us, that the thought which give* motion to 
the stars, which animates man, which doth 
everything, can be a modality, and that the 
excrements of a toad and a worm should be a 
modality of the same sovereign Being? Will 
you dare to say that so strange a principle is 
demonstrated to you? Do you not cloak your 
ignorance beneath words that you do not 
understand? Bayle has thoroughly unfolded 
the sophisms of your master in all the wind- 
ings and all the obscurities of the style of a 
pretended and really much confused geometri- 
cian, which is that of his master. I refer you 
to him; philosophers should not exclaim 
against Bayle. 

Be this as it may, I shall observe of Spinoza, 
that he very honestly deceived himself. It 
seems to me, he did not suppress in his system 
those ideas which might be troublesome to 
him, only because he was too full of his own; 
he went on in his own road, without observing 
anything that might interrupt him, and this 
is what very often happens to us. Moreover, 
he inverted all the principles of morality, 
though he was himself a rigid moralist; so 
particularly sober, that he scarce drank a pint 
of wine a month; so disinterested as to trans- 
fer to the heirs of the unfortunate John de 
Wit a pension of two hundred florins, which 
this great man had granted him: so generous 
as to give away his fortune; ever patient in 
his illness and in his property, ever consistent 
in his conduct. 



36 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

Bayle, who has so ill treated him, had nearly 
the same character. Each of them sought after 
truth all their lives by different roads. Spinoza 
frames a specious system in some respects, 
and very erroneous in the foundation. Bayle 
has combated all systems: what became of 
their writings? They have prevented the 
idleness of some readers, and this is the full 
scope of all writing; and from Thales, down 
to the professors of our universities, and the 
ruost chimerical reasoners, as well as their 
plagiarists, no one philosopher has influenced 
the manner of the very street he lived in. 
What is the reason? Because men are led by 
custom, not by metaphysics. 



XXV. ABSURDITIES. 

There are many voyages made in unknown 
countries productive of no advantage. I am 
in the situation of a man, who having wander- 
ed upon the ocean, and perceiving the Maldi- 
vian Islands with which the sea of India is in- 
terpersed, is desirous of visiting them all. My 
long voyage has been of no avail to me; let 
me see if I can reap any benefit by my ob- 
servations upon these little islands, which 
seem only to interrupt the passage. 

In a hundred courses of philosophy, such 
things are explained to me, of which nobody 
can frame the least idea. By this I am taught 
to comprehend the Trinity physically; it says 
that it resembles three dimensions of matter. 
Go on, and so will I. That pretends to com- 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 37 

municate to me transubstantiation by the 
touch, by showing me according to the laws 
of motion, how an accident may exist without a 
subject, and how one single body may be in 
two places at the same time. I shut my 
ears, and retire with still greater precipita- 
tion. 

Pascal, Blaise Pascal himself, the author of 
the Provincial Letters, utters these words: 
"Do you believe that it is impossible that God 
may be infinite and without parts? I will 
then show you a thing indivisible and infinite; 
this is a point moving everywhere with in- 
finite swiftness, for it is in every place, and 
everywhere, quite entire." 

A mathematical point that moves of itself! 
just heaven! a point that exists nowhere but 
in the head of a geometrician, which is every- 
where at the same time, of infinite swiftness, 
as if actual infinite swiftness could exist! 
Every word is frenzy and he was a great man 
that uttered these frenzies! 

Your soul, says another, is simple, incor- 
poreal, intangible; and, as no body can touch, 
I shall prove, according to the physics of Al- 
bert the Great, that it will be physically burnt, 
if you are not of my opinion: this Is the way 
I prove it to you a priori, in strengthening AJ- 
bert with the syllogisms of Abeli. 

I reply to him, I do not understand his 
priori; that I think his compliment is very 
harsh; that revelation, which we have nothing 
to do with, can alone teach me a thing so In- 
comprehensible; that I allow him to differ 



38 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

from me in opinion, without threatening him: 
and I get a good distance from him for fear 
of an accident, for he seems to be a dangerous 
man. 

A multitude of sophists of all countries over- 
whelm me with unintelligible arguments upon 
the nature of things; upon my own, upon my 
past, present and future state. If one talks 
wO them of eating and clothing, lodging, the 
necessaries of life, money by which they are 
procured, they are perfectly conversant in 
these things; are there a few pistoles to be 
got, each of them is eager to obtain them, and 
they do not make a mistake of a farthing; 
but when the question is concerning our being, 
they have not one clear idea about it. Com- 
mon sense deserts them. From hence I return 
to my first conclusion (No. IV.) that what 
cannot be of universal use, what is not within 
the reach of common men, what is not under- 
stood by those who have most exercised their 
faculty of thinking, is not necessary to man- 
kind. 

XXVI. OF THE BEST OF WORLDS. 

In my various peregrinations in search of 
instruction, I met with some disciples of Plato. 
Come along with me, said one of them, you are 
in the best of worlds; we have far surpassed 
our master. There were in his time only five 
possible worlds, because there are but five 
regular bodies; but now there are an infinity 
of possible universes; God has chosen the best; 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 39 

come and you will be satisfied with it. 

I humbly replied, The worlds which God 
might create, were either better, perfectly 
equal, or inferior. He could not choose the 
worst. Those which were equal, supposing 
such to be, could have no preference; they 
were ever completely the same; there could 
have been no choice amongst them; to fix 
upon one or the other was just the same. It 
was therefore impossible that he could avoid 
choosing the best. But how could the others 
be possible, when it is impossible they can 
exist ? 

He made some very curious distinctions, in- 
cessantly assuring me, without knowing what 
he said, that this world is the best of all 
really possible worlds. But being just then 
tortured with the stone, which gave me an al- 
most insupportable pain, the citizens of the 
best of worlds conducted me to the neighbor- 
ing hospital. In the way two of these perfect- 
ly happy inhabitants were carried off by two 
creatures of their own likeness. They were 
loaded with irons, the one for debt, the other 
upon mere suspicion. 

I know not whether I was conducted into 
one of the best possible hospitals; but I was 
crowded amongst two or three thousand 
wretches like myself. Here were many de- 
fenders of their country, who informed me, 
that they had been trepanned and dissected 
alive; that they had had arms and legs cut 
off; and that many thousand of their generous 
fellow-countrymen had been massacred in one 



40 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

of the thirty battles fought in the iast war, 
which is about the hundredth million war since 
we have been acquainted with wars. 

One might also meet in this house about a 
thousand persons of both sexes, who resem- 
bled hideous spectres, and who were rubbed 
with a certain metal, because they had follow- 
ed the law of nature, and nature had, I know 
not how, taken the precaution of poisoning in 
them the source of life. I thanked my two 
conductors. 

After a very sharp iron had been thrust 
into my bladder, and some stones were ex- 
tracted from this quarry, — when I was cured, 
and I had no further complaints than a few 
disagreeable pains for the rest of my days, I 
made my representations to my guides. 

1 took the liberty of telling them tnere was 
some good in this world, as the surgeons had 
extracted four flints from my torn entrails; 
but that I would much rather that bladders 
had been lanterns than quarries. I spoke to 
them of the innumerable calamities and crimes 
that were dispersed over this excellent world 

The boldest of the two, who was a German 
and my countryman, told me that all this was 
a mere trifle. 

Heaven was peculiarly propitious to man 
when Tarquin violated Lucretia and she stab- 
bed herself, because the tyrants were there- 
upon driven out, and rapes, suicides and war 
laid the foundation of a republic which con- 
ferred happiness upon those they vanquished. 

I had some difficulty in agreeing to this hap- 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 41 

piness. I did not immediately conceive the fe- 
licity of the Gauls and Spaniards, of whom it 
is said Caesar put three millions to the sword. 

Devastation and rapine appeared to me 
things somewhat disagreeable, but the de- 
fender of optimism did not quit his hold; he 
persevered in telling me, like Don Carlos's 
jailer, "Peace, peace, it is for your good." 

Having, however, at length run him pretty 
hard, he said, that "we should not consider 
this mere globule, where every thing is jar- 
ring; but that in the star Sirius, in Orion, the 
Ox's-Eye and elsewhere, everything is per- 
fect." 

"Let us, then, go thither," said I. 

A little theologist then took me by the arm. 
He told me, in confidence, that "those folks 
were very dreamers; that it was not in the 
least necessary that there should be any evil 
upon earth; that it was expressly formed that 
there never should be any thing but good; and 
in order to prove this, you must know that 
things formerly went on in this manner In 
Eden for ten or twelve days." 

"Alas!" I replied to him, "it is a great pity, 
reverend father, that things did not continue 



XXVI. OF MONADS. 

The same German then laid hold of me 
again. He tutored me, and clearly taught me 
the nature of my soul. 

"Every thing in nature," said he, "consists 



42 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

of monads. Your soul is a monad, and as it 
is united with all the others, it necessarily 
has ideas of all that passes in them. These 
ideas are confused, which is very necessary; 
and your monad, as well as mine, is a concen- 
trical mirror of the universe. 

"But believe not that you act in consequence 
of your thoughts. There is a pre-established 
harmony between the monad of your soul and 
the monads of your body, so that when your 
soul hath an idea, you body has a motion, 
without the one being the result of the other. 
They are two pendulums that go together; or, 
if you will, the one resembles a man who 
preaches, whilst another makes gesticulations. 
You easily conceive that this must necessarily 
be so in the best of worlds; for — 

XXVIII. OB PLASTIC FORMS 

As I have no comprehension of these ad- 
mirable ideas, an Englishman, named Cud- 
worth, discovered my ignorance and my em- 
barrassment by my fixed eyes and downcast 
look. 

"These ideas," he said, "appear deep to you, 
because they are well sifted. I will give you 
a concise notion of the manner in which na- 
ture acts. First, there is nature in general, 
then, there are plastic natures, which form all 
animals and all plants. — You understand me?" 

"Not a word, Sir." 

"Let us go on then." — 

"A plastic nature is not a corporeal faculty; 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 43 

it is an immaterial substance, which acts with- 
out knowing what it does, being entirely blind 
and insensible to reason and to vegetation. But 
the tulip has its plastic form, which makes 
it vegetate; the dog has also its plastic form, 
wljich makes it pursue the chase, and man has 
his, which makes him reason. These forms 
are immediate agents of the divinity. There 
are no ministers in the world more faithful; 
for they yield everything, and keep nothing 
for themselves. 

"You see very well that these are the true 
principles of things, and that plastic natures 
are at least equal to pre-established harmony 
and monads, which are the concentrical mir- 
ror of the universe." I acknowledged to him 
that the one was as good as the other. 

XXIX. OF LOCKE. 

After so many unfortunate excursions, fa- 
tigued, harrassed, ashamed of having sought 
after so maay truths, and found so many 
chimeras, I returned to Locke, like the prodi- 
gal son who returned to his father. I threw 
myself into the arms of a modest man, who 
never pretends to know what he is really ig- 
norant of; who, in fact, is not possessed of im- 
mense riches, but whose security is always 
good, and who enjoys the most permanent 
wealth without ostentation. 

He confirms me in the opinion I always 
entertained, that nothing obtains a place in 
our understanding but through our senses: 



44 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHY* 

That there are no innate ideas: 

That we can neither have the ideas of in- 
finite space nor infinite number: 

That I do not always think, and consequent- 
ly that thought is not the essence, but the 
action of my understanding. 

That I am free when I can do what I please: 

That this liberty does not consist in my will, 
since when I remain voluntarily in my cham- 
ber, the door of which is locked, without my 
having tne key, I am not at liberty to go out; 
as I suffer when I am not willing to suffer; 
as I frequently cannot recall my ideas when I 
am disposed to recall them. 

It is, therefore, in fact, absurd to say that 
the will is free, as it is absurd to say, I will 
such a thing; for this is precisely as if one 
were to say, I desire to desire it, I fear to 
fear it. In a word, the will is no more free 
than it is blue or square. (See Article XIII.) 

That I can only form a will in consequence 
of ideas received in my brain; that I am ne- 
cessitated to determine in consequence of those 
ideas, as I should otherwise determine with- 
out reason, which would be an effect without 
a cause: 

That I cannot have a positive idea of infin- 
ity, as I am absolutely finite. 

That I cannot know any substance, as I can 
have no ideas but of their qualities, and that 
a thousand qualities of a thing cannot com- 
municate the intimate nature of this thing, 
which may possess a hundred thousand other 
qualities that I am unacquainted with: 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER U 

That I am no longer the same person after 
I have lost my memory; for not having the 
smallest part of my body which belonged to 
me in my infancy, and not having the least re- 
membrance of the ideas that affected me at 
that age, it is clear that I am no longer that 
same child any more than I am Confucius or 
Zoroaster. 

I am reputed the same person by those who 
have observed me grow, and who have always 
resided with me; but I have in no respect the 
same existence; I am no longer my former 
self; I am a new identity; and what singular 
consequences must hence arise! 

That, in fine, agreeable to my profound ig- 
norance, of which I am convinced, according 
to the principles of things, it is impossible that 
I can know what are the substances to which 
God designs to grant the gifts of feeling and 
thinking. In fact, are there any substances 
the essence of which is to think, that always 
think, and which think by themselves ? In this 
case these substances, whatever they be, are 
gods; for they have no occasion for the eternal 
Being and Creator, as they possess their 
essences without him— as they think without 
Krm. 

Secondly. — If the eternal Being has com- 
municated the gifts of feeling and thinking to 
these beings, he has given them what did not 
essentially belong to them; he could therefore 
have given this faculty to all beings whatever. 

Thirdly. — We are unacquainted with the in- 
ward recesses of any being; wherefore it is 



46 THB IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

impossible for us to know whether a being is 
susceptible or insusceptible of sensation and 
thought. 

The words matter and spirit are mere words. 
We have no complete idea of these two things. 
Wherefore, in fact, it would be as bold to say 
that a body organized by God himself cannot 
receive thought from God himself, as it would 
be ridiculous to urge that spirit could not 
think. 

Fourthly. — I imagine there are substances 
purely spiritual, which never had any idea of 
matter and motion; would it be thought prop- 
er for them to deny that matter and motion 
may exist? 

I suppose that the learned congregation who 
condemned Galileo for impiety and absurdity 
— for having demonstrated the motion of the 
earth round the sun, had obtained some know- 
ledge of the ideas of chancellor Bacon, who 
proposed to examine whether attraction be 
given to matter. I suppose that he who made 
the report of this great tribunal remonstrated 
to these great personages, that there were 
people mad enough to suspect that God could 
communicate to all matter from Saturn down 
to our little lump of earth, a tendency to- 
wards a center, — attraction, gravitation, — 
which would be absolutely independent of all 
impulse; as impulse acts upon surfaces, and 
this gravitation actuates solids. 

Do you not find these judges of human rea- 
son, and of God himself, immediately dictate 
their sentences, anathematize this gravitation, 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 47 

(which Newton has since demonstrated,) pro- 
nounce it impossible for God to perform, and 
that gravitation towards a center is blas- 
phemy ? 

I am, methinks, guilty of the same temerity, 
when I dare aver that God cannot make any 
organized being whatever feel and think. 

Fifthly. — I cannot doubt that God has grant- 
ed sensations of the memory, and consequent- 
ly ideas, to the organized matter in animals. 
Wherefore, then, should I deny that he may 
make the same present to other animals? 
It has already been observed, that the diffi- 
culty consists less in knowing whether or-t 
ganized matter can think, than in knowing 
how any being whatever can think. 

Thought is something divine; yes, doubtless, 
and therefore I never shall know what a think- 
ing being is. The principal motion is divine; I 
shall never know the cause of this motion, the 
laws whereof all my members execute. 

Aristotle's child being at nurse, attracted 
into his mouth the nipple which he sucked, 
forming with his tongue, which he drew in, 
a pneumatic machine, pumping the air, and 
causing a vacuum: whilst his father, quite 
ignorant of this, said at random, that "nature 
abhors a vacuum." 

The child of Hippocrates, at four years of 
age, proved the circulation of the blood by 
passing his finger over his hand; and Hippoc- 
rates did not know that the blood circulated. 

We are all, great as we may be, like those 
children; we perform admirable things, and 



48 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

there is not a single philosopher who knows 
how they are done. 

Sixthly. — These are the reasons, or rather 
the doubts, produced by my intellectual faculty 
upon Locke's modest assertion. Once more, 
I do not say that it is matter which thinks 
within us. I say with Locke, that it does not 
belong to us to assert that it should be im- 
possible for God to make matter think; that 
it is absurd to declare it; and that it is not 
for worms of the earth to limit the power of 
the Supreme Being. 

Seventhly. — I add that this question is abso- 
lutely foreign to morality: because whether 
matter can, or cannot think, whoever thinks 
must be just; because the atom to which God 
shall have given thought may be worthy or 
unworthy, be punished or recompensed, and 
exist eternally, as well as the unknown being 
formerly called breath and at present spirit, 
of which we have a less idea than even an 
atom. 

I know very well that those who thought the 
being called breath could alone be susceptible 
of feeling and thinking, have persecuted those 
who have followed the sagacious Locke, and 
who have not dared to limit the power of God 
to animating only this breath. But when the 
whole universe believed that the soul was a 
light body, a breath, a substance of fire, would 
it have been just to persecute those wno came 
to teach us that the soul is immaterial? 

All the fathers of the church who thought 
the soul an extended body, would they have 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 4t 

done right to persecute the other fathers who 
communicated to man the idea of perfect im- 
materiality ? 

No, doubtless; because a persecutor is an 
abominable character. Wherefore those who 
allow of perfect immateriality, without com- 
prehending it, should have tolerated those who 
rejected it, because they did not comprehend 
it. 

Those who have refused God the power of 
animating the unknown being called matter, 
should also have tolerated those who have not 
dared to divest God of his power; for it ia 
very scandalous to hate one another for syllo- 
gisms. 

XXX. WHAT HAVE I THUS FAR 
LEARNED. 

I have then reckoned with Locke and with 
myself, and I find myself possessed of four 
or five truths, abstracted from a hundred er- 
rors, and loaded with an immense quantity of 
doubts. I said to myself afterwards, — These 
few truths which I have acquired by my rea- 
son, will be but barren land in my hands, if 
I can find no principle of morality in them. 
It is very fit for such an insignificant animal 
as man to raise himself up to the knowledge of 
the master of nature. But this will be of no 
more service to me than the science of alge- 
bra, if I do not derive from it some rule for 
the conduct of my life. 



50 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

XXXI. IS THERE ANY MORALITY. 

The more I have observed men differ bv cli- 
mate, manners, languages, laws, doctrine, and 
the measure of their understanding, the more 
I have observed they have the same fund of 
morality. They have all a barbarous notion 
of justice and injustice, without knowing a 
word of theology. They have all acquired this 
notion at an age when reason begins to un- 
fold itself: as they have naturally acquired 
the art of raising burdens with poles, and pass- 
ing a rivulet upon a piece of wood, without 
having learned the mathematics. 

It therefore appeared to me that this idea 
of justice and injustice was necessary for 
them, because they all agreed in this point, 
as soon as they could act and reason. 

The supreme intelligence which formed us 
has then been pleased that there should be 
justice upon earth, that we might live there 
for a certain time. 

It appears to me, that having neither in- 
stinct to nourish ourselves like animals, nor 
natural arms like them, and vegetating for 
several years in the imbecility of infancy, ex- 
posed to every danger, the few men that would 
have escaped from the jaws of ferocious ani- 
mals, from famine and misery, would have 
been employed in wrangling for a little nour- 
ishment and a few skins of animals; and they 
would have been destroyed like the children of 
the dragon of Cadmus, as soon as they would 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 51 

have been able to have used any arms. 

At least, there would have been no society, 
if men had not conceived the idea of some jus- 
tice, which is the tie of all society. 

How would the Egyptians, who raised pyra- 
mids and obelisks, and the wandering Scyth- 
ians, who were even unacquainted with a 
cabin, have had the same fundamental no- 
tions of justice and injustice, if God had not 
given to each of them, from the beginning of 
time, that reason which, in unfolding itself, 
made them perceive the same necessary prin- 
ciples, in the same manner as he gave them 
affections and passions, which having attain- 
ed the degree of their development, necessar- 
ily perpetuate in the same manner the race of 
the Scythian and the Egyptian? 

I perceive a barbarous, ignorant, supersti- 
tious herd, a bloody and a furious people, whev 
had not even a term in their jargon to signify 
geometry and astronomy. This people hath 
nevertheless, the same fundamental laws ad 
the wise Chaldean, who was acquainted witn 
the course of the stars, and the Phenician, 
still more learned, who availed himself of the 
knowledge of the stars to go and lay the foun- 
dation of colonies at the extremity of the 
hemisphere, where the ocean mingles with the 
Mediterranean. All these people aver that 
they should respect their father and mother; 
that perjury, calumny, and homicide are abom- 
inable crimes: they therefore derive the same 
consequences from the same principles of their 
unfolded reason. 



*2 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 



XXXII. REAL UTILITY. THE NOTION 

OF JUSTICE. 

The notion of something just, appears to 
me so natural, so universally received by all 
men, that it is independent of all law, of all 
compact, of all religion. 

Let me ask a Turk, a Guebrian or a Mala- 
barian, for the money I lent him, to enable 
him to eat and clothe himself, and he will 
never think of replying: "Wait till I learn if 
Mahomet, Zoroaster, or Brama commands me 
to restore your money." 

He will acknowledge that it is just that he 
should pay me, and if he doth not perform it, 
either his poverty, or his avarice, predomi- 
nates over the justice which he acknowledges. 

I assert it as a fact, that there are no peo- 
ple who maintain, that it is either just, right, 
proper, or honest, to refuse nourishment to 
one's father or mother, when it is practicable 
to bestow it. 

That no community has ever considered cal- 
umny as a good action, not even a sect of 
bigoted fanatics. 

The idea of justice appears to me so mmch 
a truth of the first order, to which the whole 
universe has given its assent, that the greatest 
crimes which afflict society are all commit- 
ted under the false pretence of justice. The 
greatest of all crimes, at least that which is 
the most destructive, and consequently the 
post opposite to the design of nature, Is war; 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 63 

but there never was an aggressor who did not 
gloss over his guilt with the pretext of jus- 
tice. 

The Roman depredators had all their in- 
vasions declared just, by priests named Fe- 
cials. 

Every free-booter, who finds himself at the 
head of an army, begins his foray bv a mani- 
festo, and implores the God of armies. 

Petty thieves themselves, when united in a 
society, take care not to say, "let us go and 
rob, let us go and despoil the widow and the 
orphan of their scanty pittance," but they say, 
"let us be just, let us recover our fortune from 
the hands of the rich, who have deprived us 
of it" 

They have even a dictionary among them, 
which has been printed since the sixteenth 
century, and in this vocabulary, which they 
call Argot, the words theft, robbery, rapine, 
are not to be met with. They make use of 
terms which correspond with gaining, reim- 
bursing, etc. 

The word injustice is never uttered in a 
council of state, where the most unjust mur- 
der is proposed. Even the most bloody con- 
spirators have never said, "let us commit a 
crime." They have ever said, "Avenge our 
country for the crimes of a tyrant; let us 
punish what appears to us unjust." 

In a word, servile flatterers, barbarous min- 
isters, odious conspirators, the most infamous 
robbers, all pay homage against their will, to 
that virtue they trample upon. 



64 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

I have been greatly astonished that amongst 
the French, who are enlightened and polished, 
maxims have been repeated upon the stage 
which are equally as shocking as false. 

La justice et le droit font des vaines idees, 

Le droit des rois consiste a rien epargner. 

"Justice and right are vain ideas, the 
right of kings consists in sparing nothing." 

And this abominable speech is put in the 
mouth of Phociafi, minister to young Ptolemy. 
But it is precisely because he is a minister 
that he should say the contrary; he should rep- 
resent the death of Pompey as a itecessary 
and just misfortune. 

I believe, then, that the ideas just and un- 
just, are as clear and universal as the ideas 
of health and sickness, truth and falsehood, 
convenience and inconvenience. 

The limits of justice and injustice are very 
difficult to fix; as the middle state between 
health and disease, between the convenience 
and the inconvenience of things, between false- 
hood and truth, is difficult to specify. They 
are shades that are interwoven; but glaring 
colors strike every eye. 

For example, all men agree that we should 
restore what we have borrowed; but if I know 
that the person to whom I am indebted two 
millions will make use of it to enslave my 
country, should I put such fatal arms into hi? 
hands? Here are sentiments that are divided; 
but in general I should observe my oath when 
no evil results from it. This is what no one 
ever doubted. 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 15 

XXXIII. IS UNIVERSAL CONSENT A 
PROOF OF TRUTH. 

It may be objected that the consent of men 
at all times, and in all countries, is not a proof 
of truth. All people believed in the Magi, in 
sorcery, demons, apparitions, planetary influ- 
ence, and a hundred other such like follies. 
Might it not be the same with respect to 
justice and injustice? 

It appears to me not. First, it is false that 
all men believed these chimeras. They were, 
in fact, aliment to the weakness of the vulgar; 
but a great number of sages constantly ridi- 
culed them. These numerous wise men, on 
the contrary, always admitted of justice and 
injustice, as much and even more than the 
people. 

The belief in sorcerers, demons, etc., is far 
from being necessary to mankind; the belief 
in justice is absolutely necessary, because It 
is an unfolding of that reason given by God; 
and the idea of sorcerers, people possessed, 
etc., is on the contrary, a perversion of this 
same reason. 

XXXIV. AGAINST LOCKE. 

Locke, who instructs and teaches me to mis- 
trust myself, does he not sometimes impose 
upon himself like many others? He wants to 
prove the falsity of innate ideas; but does he 
not ndd a v^ry bad reason to several gooc 



66 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

ones? He acknowledges it is not just to boil 
one's neighbor in a cauldron and eat him. He 
nevertheless says there have been nations of 
Anthropophagi; and that these thinking beings 
would not have eaten men, if they had pos- 
sessed the ideas of justice and injustice, which 
I suppose is necessary for the preservation of 
the human species. (See No. XXXVI.) 

Without entering into a disquisition, wheth- 
er there were in fact any nations of Anthro- 
pophagi, — without examining the relations of 
the traveler Dampier, who traversed all Am- 
erica, and who never saw any, but who, on the 
contrary, was received amongst all the sav- 
ages with the greatest humanity: I reply as 
follows: 

Conquerors have eaten their slaves taken in 
war. They imagine they did a very just ac- 
tion. They imagined they had a right over their 
life and death; and, as they had but few good 
meats for their table, they thought they were 
allowed to feed upon the fruit of their victory. 

They were in this more just than the Ro- 
mans, who, without reaping any advantages, 
strangled the captive princes that were chained 
to their triumphal cars. 

The Romans and the savages had a very 
false idea of justice, I allow; but they, how- 
ever, both thought they acted justly. And this 
is so true, that the same savages, when they had 
admitted these captives into their society, 
looked upon them as their children; and the 
same ancient Romans have given a thousand 
examples of admirable justice. 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER *f 

XXXV. AGAINST LOCKE. 

I agree with the sagacious Locke, that there 
is no innate idea — no innate principle of prac- 
tice. This is such an incontrovertible truth, 
that it is evident that all children would have 
a clear notion of God if they were born with 
this idea, and all men would then agree with 
this same notion — an agreement that has 
never been known. 

It is also evident that we are not born with 
innate principles of morality, as we do not 
see how a whole nation could reject a principle 
of morality which had been engraven on the 
heart of every individual of that nation. 

I suppose that we are all born with the 
moral principle well understood, that no per- 
son should be persecuted for his manner of 
thinking. How could whole communities be- 
come persecutors? I suppose that every man 
carries within himself that evident law where- 
by he is commanded to be faithful to his oath. 
How could all men, united in a body, have en- 
acted that no faith should be kept with here- 
tics? 

I repeat again, that instead of these chim- 
erical innate ideas, God has given us reason, 
which is strengthened with age, and which 
teaches us all, when we are attentive without 
prejudice, that there is a God, and that we 
should be just. But I cannot grant Locke 
the consequences he draws from rnence. He 
seems to approach too near Hobbes' system, 



58 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

though, in fact, he is very distant from it. 

These are his words in the first book of his 
Essay upon the Human Understanding. 

"View but an army at the sacking of a town, 
and see what sense of moral principles, or 
what touch of conscience they exhibit for all 
the outrages they do." 

No, they have no remorse, and why? Be- 
cause they believe they act justly. 

Not one amongst them imagines the cause 
of the Prince for whom they are fighting to 
be unjust. They risk their life for their cause 
— they fulfill the bargain they nave made. 
They might have been killed in the assault, 
they therefore think they have a right to kill; 
they might have been plundered, they there- 
fore think they may plunder. 

Add to this, that they are intoxicated with 
fury, which does not reason. And to convince 
you that they have not divested themselves 
of the idea of justice and honesty, propose to 
these same soldiers much more money than the 
plunder of the city, handsomer women than 
those they have violated, upon condition only 
that instead of murdering in their rage three 
or four thousand enemies, who still make re- 
sistance, and who may kill them, they go and 
cut the throats of their king, his chancellor, 
his secretaries of state, and his high almoner, 
you will not find a single soldier who does 
not reject your proposal with horror: and yet 
you propose but six murders, instead of four 
thousand, and you present them with a very 
valuable recompense. 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER §9 

Why do they refuse you? Because they 
think it is just to kill four thousand enemies; 
but the murder of their sovereign, to whom 
tliey are bound by a solemn oath, appears to 
them abominable. 

Locke continues his argument, and to prove 
the better that no rule of conduct is innate, 
he speaks of the Mengrelians, who out of 
sport, he says, bury their children alive; and 
of the Caribbees, who fatten them, in order 
to eat them. 

It has already been observed that this great 
man was too credulous in relating these fables. 
Lambert, who alone imputes to the Mengreli- 
ans the interment of their children alive, 
through wantonness, is not an author of suffi- 
cient credit to be quoted. 

Chardin, who passes for a traveler of verac- 
ity, and who was ransomed in Mengrelia, 
would have spoken of this horrible custom if 
it had existed; and his affirming it would not 
have been sufficient to give it credit. Twenty 
travelers of different nations and religions 
should agree to confirm such a strange cus- 
tom, in order to obtain an historical certainty 
of it. 

It is the same with the women of the Antil- 
les Islands, who raised their children to eat 
them. This is not the nature of a mother. 
The human heart is not thus framed. 

Amongst the wealthy and the great, who 
were perverted by the excesses of luxury and 
jealousy, the refinement was practiced of hav- 
ing eunuchs to wait upon and guard their 



*0 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

wives and concubines. Eunuchs were also in 
demand in Italy, and were employed at the 
Pope's Chapel, in order to have voices finer 
than those of women. 

Locke's assertions regarding the saints of 
the Mahometan religion and their useful quad- 
rupeds, should be placed with prince Maurice's 
story of the parrot, who kept up such a fine 
conversation in the Brazilian language, which 
Locke is simple enough to relate, without con- 
sidering that the prince's interpreter may have 
related a joke to him. 

In this manner the author of the Spirit of 
Laws amuses himself in quoting the imagin- 
ary laws of Tonquin, Bantam, Borneo, and 
Formosa, upon the report of some travelers, 
or romancers, or persons misinformed. 

Locke and Montesquieu are two great men, 
in whom such simplicity appears to me inex- 
cusable. 

XXXVI. NATURE EVERYWHERE THE 
SAME. 

In giving up Locke at this point, I say with 
the great Newton, Natura est semper sibi con- 
sona, Nature everywhere resembles herself. 
The law of gravitation, which acts upon a 
star, acts upon all stars, upon all matter. Thus 
the fundamental law of morality equally acts 
upon all civilized nations. There are a thous- 
and differences in the interpretation of this 
law in a thousand circumstances; but the basis 
ever remains the same, and this basis is the 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER «1 

idea of justice and injustice. Innumerable acts 
of injustice are committed in the fury of pas- 
sion, as reason is lost in drunkenness; but 
when the intoxication is over, reason returns; 
and this, in my opinion, is the only cause of 
human society subsisting, — a cause subordin- 
ate to the wants of each other's assistance. 

How then have we acquired the idea of jus- 
tice? As we acquired that of prudence, of 
truth, of conveniences, by sentiment and rea- 
son. It is impossible for us to avoid thinking 
it a very imprudent action for a man to throw 
himself into the fire, in order to be admired, 
and who should hope afterwards to escape in- 
jury. It is impossible for us to avoid think- 
ing a man very unjust for killing another in 
his passion. Society is founded entirely upon 
these notions, which can never be torn from 
the heart, and it is for this reason that all 
society subsists, whatever extravagant and 
horrible superstition it may be subject to. 

At what age are we acquainted with what 
js just and unjust ? At the age when we know 
that two and two make four. 

XXXVII. OF HOBBES. 

Thou profound and extravagant philosopher, 
thou good citizen, thou enemy of Descartes, 
who deceivedst thyself like him, thou whose 
physical errors are great but pardonable, be- 
cause thou earnest before Newton, thou wht 
hadst told truths that do not obliterate thy mis* 
takes, thou who didst first display the chiir 



«2 THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

eras of innate ideas, thou who wert the fore- 
runner of Locke in many things, as well as 
of Spinoza, in vain dost thou astonish thy 
readers by almost succeeding to prove to them 
that there are no laws in the world but the 
laws of conventions; that there is no justice or 
injustice but what has been agreed upon as 
such in a country. 

If thou hadst been alone with Cromwell in 
a desert island, and Cromwell would have kill- 
ed thee for having been a partisan of thy king 
in the island of England, would not such an 
attempt appear to thee as unjust in thy new 
island as in thine own country? 

Thou sayest in thy Law of Nature, "That 
every one having a right to all things, each 
has a right over the life of his own likenesses." 

Dost thou not confound power with right? 

Dost thou think that, in fact, power conveys 
right? and that a robust son has nothing to 
reproach himself with for having assassinat- 
ed his old and decrepid father? 

Whoever studies morality should begin by 
refuting thy book in his heart; but thine own 
heart refuted it still more; for thou wert vir- 
tuous as well as Spinoza, — and thou wert only 
wanting, like him, in teaching the principles 
of virtue, which thou didst practice and rec- 
commend to others. 

XXXVIII. UNIVERSAL MORALITY. 

Morality appears to me so universal, so cal- 
culated by the universal Being that formed 



THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 68 

us, so destined to serve as a counterpoise to 
our fatal passions, and to solace the inevitable 
troubles of this short life, that from Zoroaster 
down to Lord Shaftsbury, I find all philoso- 
phers teaching the same morality, though they 
have all different ideas upon the principles of 
things. 

We find that Hobbes, Spinoza, and Bayle 
himself, who either denied the first principles, 
o. at least doubted of them, have, neverthe- 
less, strongly recommended justice, and all the 
virtues. 

Every nation had peculiar religious rights, 
and very often absurd and revolting opinions 
in metaphysics and theology. But the point in 
question is to know whether we should be 
just. In this the whole universe agrees, as 
we said in No. XXXVI., and this statement 
cannot be too often repeated. 

XXXIX. ZOROASTER. 

I shall not examine at what time Zoroaster 
lived, whom the Persians allowed to have ex- 
isted nine thousand years before them, as well 
as Plato and the ancient Athenians. 

I find that his moral precepts, which were 
translated from the ancient language of the 
Magi into the vulgar language of the 
Guebrians, have been preserved till the present 
time; and it evidently appears, from the puer- 
ile allegories, the ridiculous observations, the 
fantastic ideas with which this collection is 



M THE IGNORANT PHILOSOPHER 

filled, that the religion of Zoroaster is of the 
highest antiquity. 

The word Garden is there used to express 
the recompence of the just; we there meet with 
the evil principle under the word Satan, which 
the Jews also adopted. We there find the 
world formed in six times or seasons. It is 
there commanded to recite an abunavar and an 
ashim vuhu, for those who sneeze. 

But, in fine, in this collection of a hundred 
subjects or precepts taken from the book of 
Zend, and which the very words of the ancient 
Zoroaster are repeated, what moral duties are 
prescribed ? 

That of loving and succoring one's father 
and mother, that of giving alms to the poor, 
that of never breaking one's word, that of 
abstaining when doubtful whether the action 
to be performed is just or not. (Subject XXX) 

I shall confine myself to this precept, be- 
cause no legislator could ever go beyond it; 
and I am confirmed in the opinion that though 
Zoroaster established ridiculous superstitions 
in matters of doctrine, the purity of his mor- 
als proves that he was not corrupt, and that 
the more he gave way to errors in his dog- 
mas, the more impossible was it for him to 
err in teaching virtue. 



