Who Are the Traitors? 

[May 1922] 
by Leon Trotsky 

First published as "Kto i chemu izmeniaet?" in Pravda #107 (May 16, 1922). 

First English edition in International Press Correspondence [Vienna], v. 2, no. 46 (June 9, 1922). 

Version here published in Soviet Russia [New York] v. 7, no. 2 (July 15, 1922), pp. 34-35. 



The Socialist Revolutionary Party at present 
occupies the center of attention, but quite differ- 
ently than at the time of the February Revolu- 
tion. It often happens in history that some party 
or other, some man or other, is at first obscured 
from view, is forgotten for some 
time and then is again remem- 
bered. The Socialist Revolu- 
tionary Party succeeded in a few 
months, one might say in a few 
weeks, in getting into power 
over the whole of Russia — so 
it seemed at least — and after- 
wards lost its influence just as 
quickly and faded into 
insignificance. The approach- 
ing trial affords us the oppor- 
tunity of reviewing the strange 
fate of the Socialist Revolution- 
ary Party. This explains the in- 
terest it arouses; it is produced 
by the necessity for understand- 
ing and arriving at certain con- 
clusions. 

I will only touch on one side of the question 
here, which it seems to me has not received 
sufficient attention in our press and which is nev- 
ertheless of great importance: the position which 
the humbler sections of the party, the rank and 
file, its minor officials respectively held or now 
hold in the party. 



At the beginning of the present century Ple- 
khanov called the Socialist Revolutionaries, "So- 
cialist Reactionaries." This was appropriate in so 
far as it described the petty bourgeois, reaction- 
ary components of its world outlook, which threat- 
ened to convert the party 
into a tool of bourgeois 
counterrevolution and 
did in fact so transform it. 
As soon as the petty bour- 
geoisie separates itself 
from the proletariat it al- 
ways inevitably becomes a 
tool of the bourgeoisie. In 
the struggle against Tsar- 
ism and feudalism the 
party played a revolution- 
ary role. It aroused the 
peasants, it stirred large 
groups of young students 
to political activity, it as- 
sembled around its stan- 
dards considerable groups 
of workers who were not 
yet either materially or mentally separated from 
the village and who considered the revolution not 
from the proletarian class point of view, but from 
the amorphous point of view of the "toiler." The 
terrorists went into the fight and gave their lives 
in exchange for the lives of Tsarist dignitaries. We 
criticized this method for we were of the opinion 




1 



Trotsky: Who Are the Traitors? [May 1922] 



that the Sazonovsf and the Kaliaevs$ would have 
been more useful to the cause of the revolution if 
they had combined their energy with the energy 
of the working masses instead of increasing their 
individual force by the explosive force of dyna- 
mite. But our work among the masses, our criti- 
cism, and our interpretation of terror converted 
these terrorist acts into external incentives for the 
revolutionary activity of the masses. It often hap- 
pened at demonstrations that the most self- 
sacrificing Marxist workers went hand in hand 
with the self-sacrificing "Narodnik" workers in 
order to oppose the Tsarist police and Cossacks 
by armed force. Later on these met in the wastes 
of Siberia, on the way to prison and exile. Among 
the humbler sections of the party there were al- 
ways excellent, determined, and self-sacrificing 
elements to be found, in spite of the theoretical 
vagueness of their ideas. 

Already at that time a chasm was beginning 
to separate the young Petrograd textile worker be- 
longing to the Socialist Revolutionary Party, who 
at any moment was prepared to sacrifice his life 
for the cause of the working class, from the intel- 
lectuals of the Avksentiev type,§ from the Heidel- 
berg and other students, philosophers, Kantians, 
Nietzscheans, who at that time differed in no way 
from the petty bourgeois radicals of France, ex- 
cept for their greater illusions and their inferior 
culture. At that time it was clear to the Marxists 
how widely these two groups would diverge from 
each other; the workers who had not freed them- 
selves yet from the influence of the "Narodnik" 
ideology and the future parliamentarians and po- 
litical job-hunters who for the moment were in 
no hurry to surrender their Socialist phraseology. 

In consequent of the war and the revolution 



the dissolution of the Socialist Revolutionary Party 
was enormously accelerated. The complete politi- 
cal and moral decay of the upper sections of the 
party was accelerated by the fact that the great 
events compelled clear and exact answers and did 
not permit of vacillation. Thus we see Chernov at 
Zimmerwald unexpectedly adhering to the Ex- 
treme Left, thus renouncing the ideal of the "Na- 
tional Party," and later on sitting in a bourgeois 
cabinet and recommending the July offensive, 
hand in hand with the Entente countries. This 
monstrous zigzag course of the leader of the party 
already foreshadowed its approaching final eclipse. 
A great quantity of trained energy, however, 
still existed in the party. The heroic past of the 
party (its sacrifices, the death sentences, Siberian 
hard labor, deportations) kept, as a result of our 
backward social conditions (the peasant major- 
ity!), the honest, subjectively revolutionary party 
of the rank and file of the party under the party 
banner at a time when the stultified upper circles 
of the party had become perfectly ripe for open 
official flunkeyism to imperialism and counter- 
revolution. All the trifling of the Central Com- 
mittee with the members of the fighting organi- 
zations, from the political and moral aspect, took 
place at the time of the transition period; the rank 
and file seriously accepted the slogans of the party, 
proceeded in the old direction and kept on cou- 
rageously to the end. They were prepared to kill, 
to sacrifice their lives against other lives. Their 
subjective motives were revolutionary. They were 
only behind the times, they did not see the enor- 
mous change that had taken place in the whole 
world situation. The upper circles saw this. They 
knew all too well that the terrorist campaign 
against the Soviets was financed from the same 



f- The member of the SR Party E.S. Sazonov assassinated Minister of Internal Affairs V.K. Plehve by throwing a bomb 
under his carriage in July of 1904. 

$- The SR Ivan P. Kaliaev assassinated Grand Duke Sergei Aleksandrovich Romanov by bomb in February of 1905. 
§- N.D. Avksentiev (1878-1943) was one of the leaders of the Right Wing of the Socialist Revolutionary Party. He 
supported the war from 1914, was a member of the Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet, and served as Interior 
Minister of the Provisional Government in July- August 1917. He emigrated in 1918 and died in the United States. 



Trotsky: Who Are the Traitors? [May 1922] 



monetary sources which but yesterday financed 
Nikolai II against us and against the Socialist Revo- 
lutionaries. The upper circles of the party could 
not be ignorant of this. They did not act merely 
under the influence of their traditions and of in- 
ertia. They speculated upon gaining advantages; 
they were, therefore, carrying on a diplomatic 
game with themselves, with history, with the im- 
perialist Allies, and above all with their own party 
and the rank and file. The Chernovs and the 
Avksentievs profited by the heroism of the 
Sazonovs and the Kaliaevs, and placed the honest 
and self-sacrificing members of the organization 
at the disposal of Noulens and Lockhart. When 
these members of the fighting organization 
grasped the significance of the historical events in 
the new world situation, when they became con- 
vinced that they were throwing their bombs at 
the behest of the French Embassy and the Roma- 
nian Embassy, they shrank back from their own 
deeds. The more determined and self-sacrificing 
they had previously been in their fight against the 
Bolsheviks with the methods which the Socialist 
Revolutionaries learned during the time of sup- 
pression, the greater now was their indignation 
and resentment. 

Some of them hesitated longer than others, 
some went abroad, some placed their lives at the 
disposal of the Workers' Republic and carried out 
the most dangerous tasks on the front in the Civil 
War. Some are still wavering. With a sort of un- 
failing instinct, however, the bourgeois press of 
the whole world denounced the stand taken by 
Semenov and Konopleva with the cry of "Ren- 
egades." At the time of the blockade of Soviet 



Russia it came to the final opinion that the So- 
cialist Revolutionaries, of whom it previously had 
known nothing, were only the Left Wing of the 
anti-Soviet front or a transmitting fighting mecha- 
nism for the terrorist measures ordered from Paris 
and London. And then one suddenly met with a 
revolt, a direct stroke of treachery on the part of 
this Left Wing! A betrayal of the cause which at 
present unites Chernov with Poincare. The spiri- 
tual revolt of Semenov, Konopleva, and others 
against the Central Committee of the party and 
against the real masters working behind the scenes 
of this Central Committee, against the Socialist 
Revolutionary Party in its present attitude, is in 
reality the immediate consequence of all that the 
past of the Socialist Revolutionary Party has to 
show in revolutionary spirit and in heroism. There 
is only one clear answer to the great and simple 
question: which and what cause were all the So- 
cialist Revolutionaries serving who were killed in 
terrorist duels and in street battles, or who died in 
Siberian hard labor and exile; the cause which is 
espoused by the Chernovs together with the 
Noulens, the Poincares, and the Lloyd Georges, 
or the cause of the Russia of the Workers and Peas- 
ants which, as Genoa demonstrated, is fighting 
alone against the raging imperialists bloodhounds! 
Those Socialist Revolutionaries who have stood 
up against the corrupt clique which is still attempt- 
ing to profit by the revolutionary traditions of the 
party can declare with a calm conscience that they 
are the trustees of all that the past of the Socialist 
Revolutionary Party has to show in heroism and 
greatness during the time of suppression and ille- 
gal work. 



Edited with footnotes by Tim Davenport. 

Trotsky portrain from a Postcard published by International Workers' Aid for Hunger Relief 
in Soviet Russia, circa 1922. Copy in the Tim Davenport collection. 

Published by 1000 Flowers Publishing, Corvallis, OR, 2006. • Free reproduction permitted. 



http://www.marxisthistory.org 



